other network applications have very different goals .
abc sports was looking for ways to lift deflated halftime ratings for `` monday night football .
'' kurt sanger , abc sports 's marketing director , says that now `` tens of thousands '' of fans call its 900 number each week to vote for the best punt return , quarterback sack , etc .
profit from the calls goes to charity , but abc sports also uses the calls as a sales tool : after thanking callers for voting , frank gifford offers a football videotape for $ 19.95 , and 5 % of callers stay on the line to order it .
jackets may be sold next .
meanwhile , nbc sports recently began `` scores plus , '' a year-round , 24-hour 900 line providing a complex array of scores , analysis and fan news .
a spokesman said its purpose is `` to bolster the impression that nbc sports is always there for people .
'' nbc 's `` on-line '' consumer minutes have increased advertiser spending during the day , the network 's weakest period .
each weekday matches a sponsor and a topic : on mondays , unilever n.v. 's lever bros. sponsors tips on diet and exercise , followed by a 30-second lever bros. commercial .
viewers can call a 900 number for additional advice , which will be tailored to their needs based on the numbers they punch -lrb- `` press one if you 're pregnant , '' etc .
-rrb- .
if the caller stays on the line and leaves a name and address for the sponsor , coupons and a newsletter will be mailed , and the sponsor will be able to gather a list of desirable potential customers .
diane seaman , an nbc-tv vice president , says nbc has been able to charge premium rates for this ad time .
she would n't say what the premium is , but it 's believed to be about 40 % above regular daytime rates .
`` we were able to get advertisers to use their promotion budget for this , because they get a chance to do couponing , '' says ms. seaman .
`` and we were able to attract some new advertisers because this is something new .
'' mr. parks of call interactive says tv executives are considering the use of 900 numbers for `` talk shows , game shows , news and opinion surveys .
'' experts are predicting a big influx of new shows in 1990 , when a service called `` automatic number information '' will become widely available .
this service identifies each caller 's phone number , and it can be used to generate instant mailing lists .
`` hard copy , '' the new syndicated tabloid show from paramount pictures , will use its 900 number for additional purposes that include research , says executive producer mark b. von s. monsky .
`` for a piece on local heroes of world war ii , we can ask people to leave the name and number of anyone they know who won a medal , '' he says .
`` that 'll save us time and get people involved .
'' but mr. monsky sees much bigger changes ahead .
`` these are just baby steps toward real interactive video , which i believe will be the biggest thing yet to affect television , '' he says .
although it would be costly to shoot multiple versions , tv programmers could let audiences vote on different endings for a movie .
fox broadcasting experimented with this concept last year when viewers of `` married ... with children '' voted on whether al should say `` i love you '' to peg on valentine 's day .
someday , viewers may also choose different depths of news coverage .
`` a menu by phone could let you decide , ` i 'm interested in just the beginning of story no. 1 , and i want story no. 2 in depth , '' mr. monsky says .
`` you 'll start to see shows where viewers program the program .
integrated resources inc. , the troubled financial-services company that has been trying to sell its core companies to restructure debt , said talks with a potential buyer ended .
integrated did n't identify the party or say why the talks failed .
last week another potential buyer , whitehall financial group -- which had agreed in august to purchase most of integrated 's core companies for $ 310 million -- ended talks with integrated .
integrated said that it would continue to pursue `` other alternatives '' to sell the five core companies and that a group of senior executives plans to make a proposal to purchase three of the companies -- integrated resources equity corp. , resources trust co. and integrated resources asset management corp .
a price was n't disclosed .
integrated also said it expects to report a second-quarter loss wider than the earlier estimate of about $ 600 million .
the company did n't disclose the new estimate but said the change was related to integrated 's failure to sell its core businesses , as well as `` other events , '' which it did n't detail , that occurred after its announcement last week that it was in talks with the unidentified prospective buyer .
meanwhile , a number of top sales producers from integrated resources equity will meet this afternoon in chicago to discuss their options .
the unit is a loosely constructed group of about 3,900 independent brokers and financial planners who sell insurance , annuities , limited partnerships , mutual funds and other investments for integrated and other firms .
the sales force is viewed as a critical asset in integrated 's attempt to sell its core companies .
whitehall cited concerns about how long integrated would be able to hold together the sales force as one reason its talks with integrated failed .
in composite trading on the new york stock exchange yesterday , integrated closed at $ 1.25 a share , down 25 cents .
integrated has been struggling to avoid a bankruptcy-law filing since june , when it failed to make interest payments on nearly $ 1 billion of debt .
integrated senior and junior creditors are owed a total of about $ 1.8 billion .
an earthquake struck northern california , killing more than 50 people .
the violent temblor , which lasted about 15 seconds and registered 6.9 on the richter scale , also caused the collapse of a 30-foot section of the san francisco-oakland bay bridge and shook candlestick park .
the tremor was centered near hollister , southeast of san francisco , and was felt as far as 200 miles away .
numerous injuries were reported .
some buildings collapsed , gas and water lines ruptured and fires raged .
the quake , which also caused damage in san jose and berkeley , knocked out electricity and telephones , cracked roadways and disrupted subway service in the bay area .
major injuries were n't reported at candlestick park , where the third game of baseball 's world series was canceled and fans evacuated from the stadium .
bush vowed to veto a bill allowing federal financing for abortions in cases of rape and incest , saying tax dollars should n't be used to `` compound a violent act with the taking of an unborn life .
'' his pledge , in a letter to democratic sen. byrd , came ahead of an expected senate vote on spending legislation containing the provision .
east germany 's politburo met amid speculation that the ruling body would oust hard-line leader honecker , whose rule has been challenged by mass emigration and calls for democratic freedoms .
meanwhile , about 125 refugees flew to duesseldorf , west germany , from warsaw , the first airlift in east germany 's refugee exodus .
the world psychiatric association voted at an athens parley to conditionally readmit the soviet union .
moscow , which left the group in 1983 to avoid explusion over allegations that political dissidents were being certified as insane , could be suspended if the misuse of psychiatry against dissenters is discovered during a review within a year .
nasa postponed the liftoff of the space shuttle atlantis because of rain near the site of the launch pad in cape canaveral , fla .
the flight was rescheduled for today .
the spacecraft 's five astronauts are to dispatch the nuclear-powered galileo space probe on an exploratory mission to jupiter .
senate democratic leaders said they had enough votes to defeat a proposed constitutional amendment to ban flag burning .
the amendment is aimed at skirting a supreme court ruling that threw out the conviction of a texas flag-burner on grounds that his freedom of speech was violated .
federal researchers said lung-cancer mortality rates for people under 45 years of age have begun to decline , particularly for white males .
the national cancer institute also projected that overall u.s. mortality rates from lung cancer should begin to drop in several years if cigarette smoking continues to abate .
bush met with south korean president roh , who indicated that seoul plans to further ease trade rules to ensure that its economy becomes as open as the other industrialized nations by the mid-1990s .
bush assured roh that the u.s. would stand by its security commitments `` as long as there is a threat '' from communist north korea .
the bush administration is seeking an understanding with congress to ease restrictions on u.s. involvement in foreign coups that might result in the death of a country 's leader .
a white house spokesman said that while bush would n't alter a longstanding ban on such involvement , `` there 's a clarification needed '' on its interpretation .
india 's gandhi called for parliamentary elections next month .
the balloting , considered a test for the prime minister and the ruling congress -lrb- i -rrb- party , comes amid charges of inept leadership and government corruption .
gandhi 's family has ruled independent india for all but five years of its 42-year history .
the soviet union abstained from a u.n. general assembly vote to reject israel 's credentials .
it was the first time in seven years that moscow has n't joined efforts , led by moslem nations , to expel israel from the world body , and was viewed as a sign of improving soviet-israeli ties .
israel was seated by a vote of 95-37 , with 15 abstentions .
black activist walter sisulu said the african national congress would n't reject violence as a way to pressure the south african government into concessions that might lead to negotiations over apartheid .
the 77-year-old sisulu was among eight black political activists freed sunday from prison .
london has concluded that austrian president waldheim was n't responsible for the execution of six british commandos in world war ii , although he probably was aware of the slayings .
the report by the defense ministry also rejected allegations that britain covered up evidence of waldheim 's activities as a german army officer .
an international group approved a formal ban on ivory trade despite objections from southern african governments , which threatened to find alternative channels for selling elephant tusks .
the move by the convention on trade in endangered species , meeting in switzerland , places the elephant on the endangered-species list .
an assassin in colombia killed a federal judge on a medellin street .
an anonymous caller to a local radio station said cocaine traffickers had slain the magistrate in retaliation for the extraditions of colombians wanted on drug charges in the u.s. .
libyan leader gadhafi met with egypt 's president mubarak , and the two officials pledged to respect each other 's laws , security and stability .
they stopped short of resuming diplomatic ties , severed in 1979 .
the reconciliation talks in the libyan desert town of tobruk followed a meeting monday in the egyptian resort of mersa metruh .
alpine group inc. revised its exchange offer for $ 43.7 million face amount of 13.5 % senior subordinated debt due 1996 and extended the offer to oct. 27 from oct. 12 .
the hackensack , n.j. , company said holders would receive for each $ 1,000 face amount , $ 750 face amount of a new issue of secured senior subordinated notes , convertible into common stock at an initial rate of $ 6.50 a share , and 50 common shares .
the new notes will bear interest at 5.5 % through july 31 , 1991 , and thereafter at 10 % .
under the original proposal , the maker of specialty coatings and a developer of information-display technologies offered $ 400 of notes due 1996 , 10 common shares and $ 175 in cash for each $ 1,000 face amount .
completion of the exchange offer is subject to the tender of at least 80 % of the debt , among other things .
alpine , which said it does n't plan to further extend the offer , said it received $ 615,000 face amount of debt under the original offer .
the stock of ual corp. continued to be pounded amid signs that british airways may balk at any hasty reformulation of the aborted $ 6.79 billion buy-out of united airlines ' parent .
ual stock plummeted a further $ 24.875 to $ 198 on volume of more than 2.8 million shares in new york stock exchange composite trading .
the plunge followed a drop of $ 56.875 monday , amid indications the takeover may take weeks to be revived .
the stock has fallen $ 87.25 , or 31 % , in the three trading days since announcement of the collapse of the $ 300-a-share takeover jolted the entire stock market into its second-worst plunge ever .
`` this is a total bloodbath '' for takeover-stock traders , one investment banker said .
los angeles financier marvin davis , who put united in play with a $ 5.4 billion bid two months ago , last night proffered both a ray of hope and an extra element of uncertainty by saying he remains interested in acquiring ual .
but he dropped his earlier $ 300-a-share back-up bid , saying he must first explore bank financing .
even as citicorp and chase manhattan corp. scrambled to line up bank financing for a revised version of the lapsed labor-management bid , british airways , a 15 % partner in the buying group , indicated it wants to start from scratch .
its partners are united 's pilots , who were to own 75 % , and ual management at 10 % .
adding insult to injury , united 's 25,000-member machinists ' union , which helped scuttle financing for the first bid , yesterday asked ual chairman stephen wolf and other ual directors to resign .