amr corp. posted an 8.8 % drop in third-quarter net income and said the fourth quarter will be `` disappointing '' as well , primarily because of slimmer profit margins and increased fuel costs .
amr 's earnings decline comes a year after the parent company of american airlines and the rest of the airline industry set profit records .
some analysts say the latest results only seem pale by comparison with a spectacular second half of 1988 .
still , amr 's stumble does n't bode well for the rest of the industry .
the fort worth , texas , company is generally regarded as one of the best-run in the business , and its difficulties are likely to be reflected industrywide as other major carriers report third-quarter results over the next several days .
meanwhile , the company 's board , which had said nothing publicly about investor donald trump 's recently withdrawn $ 7.5 billion offer for amr , issued a statement condemning `` ill-conceived and reckless '' bids and saying it was `` pleased '' that mr. trump had backed out .
in the third quarter , amr said , net fell to $ 137 million , or $ 2.16 a share , from $ 150.3 million , or $ 2.50 a share .
revenue rose 17 % to $ 2.73 billion from $ 2.33 billion a year earlier .
amr 's chairman , robert l. crandall , said the results were due to an 11 % year-to-year increase in fuel prices and a slight decrease in yield , an industry measure analogous to profit margin on each seat sold .
`` we think these trends will continue and will produce a very disappointing fourth quarter as well , '' he said .
tim pettee , an analyst with merrill lynch & co. , said : `` the business turned faster than expected .
costs are giving them a little bit of trouble , and the whole industry is having a pricing problem .
'' for the nine months , amr 's net rose 15 % to $ 415.9 million , or $ 6.59 a share , from $ 360.1 million , or $ 5.99 a share .
revenue jumped 22 % to $ 7.89 billion from $ 6.46 billion .
amr 's board , in a statement after a regular meeting yesterday , said : `` ill-considered and reckless acquisition proposals adversely affect employee , financial and business relationships and are contrary to the best interests of amr shareholders ... .
amr has not been , and is not , for sale .
'' mr. crandall said the company 's current decline in earnings is exactly the kind of situation that an excessively leveraged company laden with debt from a takeover would find difficult to weather .
`` our very disappointing third-quarter results and the discouraging outlook for the fourth quarter underscore the importance of an adequate capital base , '' he said .
christopher whittington , 51-year-old deputy chairman of this british investment-banking group and chairman of morgan grenfell & co. , the group 's main banking unit , has retired from his executive duties .
succeeding mr. whittington as deputy chairman of the group is anthony richmond-watson , 43 , currently a main board member .
succeeding mr. whittington at morgan grenfell & co. is richard webb , 50 , currently deputy chairman .
mr. whittington will remain on the main group board as a nonexecutive director .
without federal subsidies to developers of beach houses , the economic and structural damage by hurricane hugo in south carolina would have been much less , as highlighted by your oct. 3 editorial `` subsidizing disaster .
'' congress should stop throwing tax dollars out to sea by subsidizing the development of beach communities on ecologically fragile coastal barrier islands , such as the hard-hit isle of palms near charleston .
as you mentioned , subsidies for development on a number of barrier islands were curtailed in 1982 by the coastal barrier resource system .
the national taxpayers union would like congress to add 800,000 acres to the 453,000 of shoreline in the system by enacting `` the coastal barrier improvement act of 1989 .
'' this bill simply says that if you want to develop property on a barrier island you have to do so without taxpayer support .
private-property rights would be upheld because the legislation would not ban coastal development .
however , home builders would have to bear the full costs of such beach-house construction .
a taxpayers union study concluded the bill would save taxpayers up to $ 9.3 billion in barrier-island subsidies over 20 years .
already , the 1982 legislation has saved an estimated $ 800 million .
marshall y. taylor communications director national taxpayers union the government said 13.1 % of americans , or 31.9 million people , were living in poverty in 1988 .
while last year 's figure was down from 13.4 % in 1987 and marked the fifth consecutive annual decline in the poverty rate , the census bureau said the 1988 drop was n't statistically significant .
the bureau 's report also showed that while some measures of the nation 's economic well-being improved modestly in 1988 , the fruits of prosperity were shared less equitably than the year before .
summarizing data derived from a march 1989 survey of 58,000 households , william butz , associate director of the census bureau , said that `` most groups either stayed the same or improved .
'' but , he added , `` since the late 1960s , the distribution of income has been slowly getting less equal .
there was no reversal -lcb- of that trend -rcb- between 1987 and 1988 .
'' per capita income , a widely used measure of a nation 's economic health , hit a record in 1988 , rising 1.7 % after inflation adjustment to $ 13,120 .
but the median income of american families fell 0.2 % , the first time it has failed to rise since 1982 .
mr. butz said the divergence in the two measures reflects changes in family size and structure , including the rising number of female-headed families and a sharp increase in income reported by americans who are n't living in families .
as a result of last year 's decline , the government 's estimate for the number of people living below the poverty line declined by about 500,000 .
the poverty threshold , defined as three times food expenses as calculated by the agricultural department , last year was $ 12,092 for a family of four .
the census bureau counts all cash income in determining whether families are below the line , but it does n't consider other government benefits , such as medicare .
thanks largely to the continued growth of the u.s. economy , the poverty rate is now substantially lower than the 1983 peak of 15.3 % , but the improvements have been modest in the past couple of years .
poverty remains far more widespread among blacks than other americans .
in 1988 , 31.6 % of blacks lived in poverty , compared with 10.1 % for whites and 26.8 % for hispanics .
but two-thirds of all poor americans were white .
more than half of poor families were headed by women living without men , the bureau said .
more than three-fourths of poor black families were headed by women .
the poverty rate of children under 18 years old dropped last year to 19.7 % from 20.5 % in 1987 , but remained far higher than a decade ago .
the rate among the elderly -- 12 % in 1988 -- was n't significantly lower than the year before .
if it were n't for social security payments , more than three times as many elderly would be below the poverty line , mr. butz said .
the census bureau also said : -- some 17.2 % of all money income received by families in 1988 went to the wealthiest 5 % of all families , up from 16.9 % in 1987 .
that is the greatest share reported for any year since 1950 , although changing definitions over the years distort the comparison .
-- the top fifth of all families got 44 % of the income , up from 41.5 % a decade earlier .
the bottom fifth of all families got 4.6 % of the income , down from 5.2 % a decade earlier .
-- confirming other government data showing that wages are n't keeping pace with inflation , earnings of year-round , full-time male workers fell 1.3 % in 1988 after adjusting for higher prices , the first such drop since 1982 .
earnings of female workers were unchanged .
-- women working full-time earned 66 cents for every dollar earned by men , a penny more than in 1987 and seven cents more than in 1978 .
-- median household income -- which includes both those living in families and those who are n't -- rose 0.3 % last year to $ 27,225 after inflation .
it rose sharply in the northeast and midwest and fell slightly in the south and west .
median family income was $ 32,191 , down 0.2 % .
-- per capita income of blacks , though still only 60 % that of whites , rose 3.9 % in 1988 , while per capita income of whites rose only 1.5 % .
-- among married couples , the gap between blacks and whites narrowed sharply , as income of black families shot up 6.8 % while income of whites did n't budge .
fueling a controversy that has been simmering for years , the census bureau also said its figures would look far rosier if it recalculated the poverty threshold using an improved consumer-price measure adopted in 1983 .
the bureau said some 3.5 million fewer people would have fallen below the poverty line in 1988 -- and the poverty rate would have been 10.5 % instead of 13.1 % -- under the alternative calculation .
critics on the left and right have been calling for all sorts of revisions to the measure for years .
a report by the staff of the joint economic committee of congress released yesterday concluded , `` it is misleading to make this change without adjusting for other changes .
'' the official poverty threshold is set by the office of management and budget .
john e. hayes jr. was elected chairman , president and chief executive officer , succeeding david s. black , who retired .
mr. hayes , 52 years old , left southwestern bell telephone co. in january , where he had been chairman , president and chief executive , to join triad capital partners , a st. louis company with interests in solid waste and recycling , telecommunications and international venture capital .
he has resigned his posts at triad to take the kansas power positions .
kansas power said mr. black , 61 , chose early retirement .
the space shuttle atlantis boosted the galileo spacecraft on its way to jupiter , giving a big lift as well to an ambitious u.s. program of space exploration .
seven years late in the launching , $ 1 billion over budget and a target of anti-nuclear protestors , galileo has long been a symbol of trouble for the national aeronautics and space administration .
but yesterday , as atlantis rumbled into a patch of clear sky above florida with storm clouds closing in on it , nasa sought to turn galileo into a symbol of triumph .
`` nasa did it right ; that 's the message , '' said j.r. thompson , the agency 's deputy administrator .
the $ 1.4 billion robot spacecraft faces a six-year journey to explore jupiter and its 16 known moons .
if all goes well , it will parachute a probe into the dense jovian atmosphere in july 1995 to pick up detailed data about gases that may be similar to the material from which the solar system was formed 4.6 billion years ago .
jupiter is so enormous -- its mass is 318 times that of earth -- that its gravity may have trapped these primordial gases and never let them escape .
investigating jupiter in detail may provide clues to what astronomer tobias owen calls the `` cosmic paradox '' of life : jupiter and other bodies in the outer solar system are rich in elements such as hydrogen that are essential for life on earth , but these planets are lifeless ; earth , on the other hand , has a diminished store of such material but is rich in life .
some scientists have suggested that comets and asteroids may have brought enough of this kind of material from the outer solar system to earth to spawn life .
beginning in december 1995 , galileo will begin a two-year tour of the jovian moons .
in 1979 , two voyager spacecraft sent back stunning photos of jovian moons io and europa that showed them to be among the most intriguing bodies in the solar system .
the photos showed active geysers on io spewing sulfurous material 190 miles into its atmosphere and indicated that europa may have an ocean hidden under a thick sheet of ice .
galileo 's photos of europa will be more than 1,000 times as sharp as voyager 's , according to torrence johnson , galileo 's project scientist , and may show whether it actually has the only known ocean other than those on earth .
atlantis lifted galileo from the launch pad at 12:54 p.m. edt and released the craft from its cargo bay about six hours later .
`` galileo is on its way to another world in the hands of the best flight controllers in this world , '' atlantis commander donald williams said .
`` fly safely .
'' the five-member atlantis crew will conduct several experiments , including growing plants and processing polymeric materials in space , before their scheduled landing at edwards air force base , calif. , monday .
the galileo project started in 1977 , and a number of project veterans were on hand to watch the launch .
an ebullient mr. johnson , wearing a nasa baseball cap and carrying a camera and binoculars , called the launch `` fantastic .
'' benny chin , manager of the galileo probe , compared it to watching a child leave home .
`` i 'm happy and sad , '' he said .
anti-nuclear activists took a less positive view .
having argued that galileo 's plutonium power source could have released lethal doses of radiation if the shuttle exploded yesterday , they were n't quieted by yesterday 's successful launch .
galileo will skim past earth in 1990 and 1992 , collecting energy from the planet 's gravitational field to gain momentum for its trip to jupiter .
the protesters point out that galileo also could crash to earth then .
they said they dropped plans to infiltrate the kennedy space center after nasa beefed up its security .
one protest did get past nasa 's guard , though ; a computer virus caused anti-galileo messages to flash onto some computer screens at nasa centers .
the successful launch continues a remarkable recovery in the u.s. space-science program .
an unmanned spacecraft , magellan , already is heading to venus and is due to begin mapping the planet next august .
voyager 2 sent back spectacular photos of neptune and its moon , triton , this summer .
next month , nasa plans to launch a satellite to study cosmic rays dating from the birth of the universe .
in december , the shuttle columbia will try to retrieve a satellite that 's been in orbit for nearly five years measuring the deleterious effects of space on materials and instruments .
next march , the shuttle discovery will launch the hubble space telescope , a $ 1.5 billion instrument designed to see the faintest galaxies in the universe .
not all of nasa 's space-science work will be so auspicious , though .
around thanksgiving , the solar max satellite , which nasa repaired in orbit in 1984 , will tumble back into the earth 's atmosphere .
nasa wo n't attempt a rescue ; instead , it will try to predict whether any of the rubble will smash to the ground and where .
the associated press 's earthquake coverage drew attention to a phenomenon that deserves some thought by public officials and other policy makers .
private relief agencies , such as the salvation army and red cross , mobilized almost instantly to help people , while the washington bureaucracy `` took hours getting into gear .
'' one news show we saw yesterday even displayed 25 federal officials meeting around a table .
we recall that the mayor of charleston complained bitterly about the federal bureaucracy 's response to hurricane hugo .
the sense grows that modern public bureaucracies simply do n't perform their assigned functions well .
bally manufacturing corp. and new york developer donald trump have agreed in principle to a $ 6.5 million settlement of shareholder litigation stemming from bally 's alleged greenmail payment to mr. trump .
according to lawyers familiar with the settlement talks , the verbal agreement to end a lawsuit filed more than two years ago was reached last week and will soon be submitted to a federal judge in camden , n.j .
in february 1987 , bally thwarted a possible hostile takeover bid from mr. trump by agreeing to buy 2.6 million of mr. trump 's 3.1 million bally shares for $ 83.7 million -- more than $ 18 million above market price .
the term greenmail refers to a situation where a company pays a premium over market value to repurchase a stake held by a potential acquirer .
lawyers for shareholders , bally and mr. trump all declined to talk publicly about the proposed settlement , citing a request by a federal court magistrate not to reveal details of the agreement until it is completed .
but some attorneys who are familiar with the matter said the $ 6.5 million payment will be shared by bally and mr. trump , with the casino and hotel concern probably paying the bulk of the money .
the amount bally and mr. trump will pay to settle the class-action suit pales in comparison to the $ 45 million walt disney co. and saul steinberg 's reliance group holdings inc. agreed to pay to settle a similar suit in july .
that settlement represented the first time shareholders were granted a major payment in a greenmail case .
mr. steinberg made a $ 59.7 million profit on the sale to disney of his investment in the company in 1984 .
but lawyers said mr. steinberg probably faced much more potential liability because , when he sued disney during his takeover battle , he filed on behalf of all shareholders .
when disney offered to pay mr. steinberg a premium for his shares , the new york investor did n't demand the company also pay a premium to other shareholders .
when mr. trump sued bally , he sued only on behalf of himself .
mr. trump and bally also appeared to have some leverage in the case because in the state of delaware , where bally is incorporated , courts have held that greenmail is often protected by the business-judgment rule .
that rule gives boards of directors wide latitude in deciding how to deal with dissident shareholders .
senate hears final arguments in impeachment trial of federal judge .
yesterday , u.s. judge alcee hastings faced his jury -- the full u.s. senate -- and said , `` i am not guilty of having committed any crime .
'' seventeen articles of impeachment against the florida judge , one of the few blacks on the u.s. bench , were approved by the house in august 1988 .
the central charge against judge hastings is that he conspired with a washington lawyer to obtain a $ 150,000 bribe from defendants in a criminal case before the judge , in return for leniency .
he is also accused of lying under oath and of leaking information obtained from a wiretap he supervised .
the senate 's public gallery was packed with judge hastings ' supporters , who erupted into applause after he finished his argument .
judge hastings , who was acquitted of similar charges by a federal jury in 1983 , claims he is being victimized and that the impeachment proceedings against him constitute double jeopardy .
but rep. john bryant -lrb- d. , texas -rrb- , the lead counsel for the house managers who conducted a lengthy inquiry into judge hastings ' activities , said `` a mountain of evidence points to his certain guilt .
'' the senate will deliberate behind closed doors today and is scheduled to vote on the impeachment tomorrow .
if the judge is impeached , as is thought likely , he will be removed from office immediately .
however , judge hastings has said he will continue to fight and is contemplating an appeal of any impeachment to the u.s. supreme court .
companies seeking to make insurers pay for pollution cleanup win court victory .
in a case involving avondale industries inc. and its insurer , travelers cos. , the second u.s. circuit court of appeals in new york ruled in favor of the company on two issues that lawyers say are central to dozens of pollution cases around the country .
travelers and other insurers have maintained that cleanup costs are n't damages and thus are n't covered under commercial policies .
they also have argued that government proceedings notifying a company of potential responsibility do n't fit the legal definition of a lawsuit ; thus , such governmental proceedings are n't covered by the policies , the insurers say .
the appeals court disagreed on both counts .
avondale was notified by louisiana officials in 1986 that it was potentially responsible for a cleanup at an oil-recycling plant .
avondale asked travelers to defend it in the state proceeding , but the insurer did n't respond .
the appeals court upheld a district judge 's ruling that the insurer had to defend the company in such proceedings .
the appeals court also said , `` we think an ordinary businessman reading this policy would have believed himself covered for the demands and potential damage claims '' stemming from any cleanup .
`` this decision will have a very considerable impact , '' said kenneth abraham , professor of environmental law and insurance law at the university of virginia , because many commercial insurance policies are issued by companies based in new york .
william greaney , an attorney for the chemical manufacturers association , said that while other appeals courts have ruled differently on whether cleanup costs are damages , the influence of the appeals court in new york `` will make insurers sit up and listen .
'' he said the decision was the first in which a federal appeals court has ruled whether administrative government proceedings qualify as litigation .
barry r. ostrager , an attorney for travelers , said , `` there are procedural bases on which this case will be appealed further .
'' new york 's poor face nearly three million legal problems a year without legal help .
that is the conclusion of a report released by the new york state bar association .
the report was based on a telephone survey of 1,250 low-income households across the state , a mail survey of major legal-services programs and on-site interviews with individuals in the field .
`` the report provides detailed documentation of the extent and nature of the problem and indicates how we may want to shape solutions , '' said joseph genova , chairman of the committee that oversaw the survey and a partner at the law firm of milbank , tweed , hadley & mccloy .
according to the study , slightly more than 34 % of those surveyed reported having at least one housing problem every year for which they had no legal help .
nearly 36 % ranked housing problems as their most serious unmet legal need .
other areas targeted by the survey 's respondents included difficulty obtaining or maintaining public benefits -lrb- 22 % -rrb- , consumer fraud -lrb- 15.4 % -rrb- , and health-care issues -lrb- 15 % -rrb- .
during the 15-month survey , 43 % of all legal-services programs said that at some period they were unable to accept new clients unless they had an emergency .
mr. genova said the committee may meet to propose solutions to the problems identified in the study .
prosecutor to join gibson dunn : assistant u.s. attorney randy mastro , who headed the government 's racketeering case against the international brotherhood of teamsters , will join gibson , dunn & crutcher in its new york office .
mr. mastro has been with the new york u.s. attorney 's office for nearly five years .
in 1987 he became deputy chief of the civil division .
mr. mastro will do civil litigation and white-collar defense work for gibson dunn , which is based in los angeles .
former apple computer inc. general counsel john p. karalis has joined the phoenix , ariz. , law firm of brown & bain .
mr. karalis , 51 , will specialize in corporate law and international law at the 110-lawyer firm .
before joining apple in 1986 , mr. karalis served as general counsel at sperry corp .
after failing to find a buyer for the sears tower in chicago , sears , roebuck & co. is negotiating with boston pension fund adviser aldrich , eastman & waltch inc. to refinance the property for close to $ 850 million , according to people close to the negotiations .
under the proposed agreement involving the world 's tallest building , chicago-based sears would receive about half the money through conventional mortgage financing and the other half as a convertible mortgage .
at the end of the term of the convertible loan , sears could still own half the building , and aew could own the other half .
neither side would comment .
the parties are currently negotiating over who would manage the building , which will be emptied of 6,000 employees from sears ' merchandise group , which is moving elsewhere .
the new manager will face the daunting task of leasing 1.8 million square feet in a relatively soft chicago real estate market .
also , it has not yet been decided exactly how much of the mortgage aew will be able to convert into equity .
convertible mortgages have become an increasingly popular way to finance prestigious buildings of late .
in a convertible mortgage , the investor lends the building owner a certain amount in return for the option to convert its interest into equity , usually less than 50 % , at the end of the loan term .
during the term , the lender can either receive a percentage of cash flow , a percentage of the building 's appreciation or a fixed return .
the main advantage of a convertible mortgage is that it is not a sale and therefore does not trigger costly transfer taxes and reappraisal .
sears said it would put the 110-story tower on the block almost a year ago as part of its anti-takeover restructuring .
but japanese institutions shied away from bidding on the high-profile tower out of fear their purchase of the property would trigger anti-japanese sentiment .
last summer , sears appeared to have a deal with canadian developer olympia & york developments ltd .
but that deal fell through in september after it became clear that the sale would lead to a major real estate tax reassessment , raising property taxes , and making it difficult to lease the building at competitive prices .
real estate industry executives said sears ' investment banker , goldman , sachs & co. , sought financing in japan .
however , japanese authorities apparently were concerned that a refinancing also would attract too much publicity .
sears then went back to aew , the boston pension adviser that had proposed a convertible debt deal during the first round of bids last spring .
aew has $ 3.5 billion of real estate investments nationwide , according to a spokesman .
tandy corp. said it signed a definitive agreement to acquire two units of datatronic ab of stockholm for cash .
the amount was n't disclosed .
the electronics maker and retailer previously estimated the sale price at between $ 100 million and $ 200 million for datatronic 's victor microcomputer and micronic hand-held computer subsidiaries .
in addition , tandy will acquire rights to the victor and micronic names for computers .
during 1988 , the datatronic subsidiaries had combined sales in excess of $ 200 million .
the transaction will give tandy a well-known european computer brand that includes 2,700 dealers and distributors marketing to medium-sized business and educational institutions .
closing of the transaction is subject to certain conditions and regulatory approvals , the company said .
two rules in pending congressional legislation threaten to hinder leveraged buy-outs by raising the price tags of such deals by as much as 10 % .
wall street is seething over the rules , which would curtail the tax deductibility of debt used in most lbos .
the provisions , in deficit-reduction bills recently passed by the house and senate , could further cool the takeover boom that has been the driving force behind the bull market in stocks for much of the 1980s , some tax experts and investment bankers argue .
indeed , some investment bankers have already started restructuring deals to cope with the expected rules .
wall street has all but conceded on the issue and is now lobbying for the less onerous senate version of one of the provisions .
at issue is the deductibility of certain junk bonds that are used in most lbos .
such high-yield debt is similar to a zero-coupon bond in that it is sold at a discount to face value , with interest accruing instead of being paid to the holder .
under current rules , that accrued interest is deductible by the company issuing the debt .
the house version of the legislation would kill that deduction , and label any such debt as equity , which is n't deductible .
the less-rigorous senate version would defer the deductibility for roughly five years .
`` you see these in just about every lbo , '' said robert willens , senior vice president in charge of tax issues at shearson lehman hutton inc. in new york .
`` it becomes a source of cash '' for the company making the lbo because it gets a deduction and does n't have to repay the debt for several years .
typically , mr. willens estimates , this type of debt makes up 15 % to 20 % of the financing for lbos .
these types of bonds have been used in buy-outs of companies such as rjr nabisco inc. , storer communications inc. and kroger co .
a second provision passed by the senate and house would eliminate a rule allowing companies that post losses resulting from lbo debt to receive refunds of taxes paid over the previous three years .
for example , if a company posted a loss of $ 100 million from buy-out interest payments , the existing rule would allow the concern to be able to receive a refund from the tax it paid from 1986 through 1989 , when it may have been a profitable public company .
but that rule is being virtually overlooked by wall street , which is concentrating on coping with the deduction issue .
`` prices for lbos have to come down if you do n't have that feature , '' argued lawrence schloss , managing director for merchant banking at donaldson , lufkin & jenrette securities corp. in new york .
several wall street officials say the proposed legislation already is having an impact .
an investment group led by chicago 's pritzker family recently lowered a $ 3.35 billion bid for american medical international , beverly hills , calif. , because of the threat of the legislation .
moreover , one investment banker , who requested anonymity , said his firm did n't raise the ante for a target company earlier this month after a stronger bid emerged from a public company that was n't concerned about the financing provision .
`` we would have paid more if we thought that law was n't going to pass , '' he said .
one possible solution for wall street is to increase the equity part of the transaction -- that is , give lenders a bigger stake in the surviving company rather than just interest payments .
that would force the buy-out firm and the target company 's management to reduce their level of ownership .
`` the pigs in the trough may have to give a little bit of the slop back and then the deal can go through , '' said peter c. canellos , tax partner at wachtell , lipton , rosen & katz .
another solution , said a tax lawyer who requested anonymity , is for firms to use convertible bonds that sell at a discount .
since they have a lower interest rate , they would n't fall under the junk-bond category that would lose its deductibility .
the house version of the bill would make debt non-deductible if it pays five percentage points above treasury notes , has at least a five-year maturity and does n't pay interest for at least one year out of the first five .
the bill would then declare that the debt is equity and therefore is n't deductible .
the senate bill would only deny the deduction until interest is actually paid .
currently , even though the issuer does n't pay tax , the debt holder is taxed on the accrued interest .
but those holders are often foreign investors and tax-exempt pension funds that do n't pay taxes on their holdings .
the senate estimates that its version of the provision would yield $ 17 million the first year and a total of $ 409 million over five years .
the house version would raise slightly more .
even if wall street finds ways around the new rules , a senate aide contends lbos will become somewhat more difficult .
`` there 's no question it will make lbos more expensive , '' he said .
`` the interest deduction was the engine that made these things more productive .
the average publicly offered commodity fund fell 4.2 % in september , largely because of the volatile markets in foreign currencies , according to norwood securities .
the firm said that losers outnumbered gainers by more than three to one among the 122 funds it tracks .
for the first nine months of the year , norwood said the average fund has lost 3.3 % .
the government moved aggressively to open the spigots of federal aid for victims of the california earthquake , but its reservoir of emergency funds must be replenished soon if the aid is to continue .
president bush signed a disaster declaration covering seven northern california counties .
the declaration immediately made the counties eligible for temporary housing , grants and low-cost loans to cover uninsured property losses .
in addition , an unusually wide array of federal agencies moved to provide specialized assistance .
the department of housing and urban development prepared to make as many as 100 vacant houses available for those left homeless , the agriculture department was set to divert food from the school-lunch program to earthquake victims , and the pentagon was providing everything from radio communications to blood transfusions to military police for directing traffic .
but the pool of federal emergency-relief funds already is running low because of the heavy costs of cleaning up hurricane hugo , and congress will be under pressure to allocate more money quickly .
in hugo 's wake , congress allocated $ 1.1 billion in relief funds , and white house spokesman marlin fitzwater said $ 273 million of that money remains and could be diverted for quick expenditures related to the earthquake .
now , though , enormous costs for earthquake relief will pile on top of outstanding costs for hurricane relief .
`` that obviously means that we wo n't have enough for all of the emergencies that are now facing us , and we will have to consider appropriate requests for follow-on funding , '' mr. fitzwater said .
the federal government is n't even attempting yet to estimate how much the earthquake will cost it .
but mr. fitzwater said , `` there will be , i think quite obviously , a very large amount of money required from all levels of government .
'' in congress , lawmakers already are looking for ways to add relief funds .
money could be added to a pending spending bill covering the federal emergency management agency , which coordinates federal disaster relief .
more likely , relief funds could be added to an omnibus spending bill that congress is to begin considering next week .
but it is n't just washington 's relief dollars that are spread thin ; its relief manpower also is stretched .
fema still has special disaster centers open to handle the aftermath of hugo , and spokesman russell clanahan acknowledged that `` we 're pretty thin .
'' mr. clanahan says fema now possibly may have the heaviest caseload in its history .
to further complicate relief efforts , the privately funded american red cross also finds itself strapped for funds after its big hugo operation .
`` it 's been a bad month money-wise and every other way , '' said sally stewart , a spokeswoman for the red cross .
`` it just makes it a little rough when you have to worry about the budget .
'' the red cross has opened 30 shelters in the bay area , serving 5,000 people .
twenty-five trucks capable of cooking food were dispatched from other states .
all the precise types of federal aid that will be sent to california wo n't be determined until state officials make specific requests to fema , agency officials said .
and in the confusion after the earthquake , `` the information flow is a little slow coming in from the affected area , '' said carl suchocki , a fema spokesman .
still , some aid is moving westward from washington almost immediately .
hud officials said they will make available as many as 100 bay area houses that are under hud loans but now are vacant after the houses have been inspected to ensure they are sound .
additional housing vouchers and certificates will be made available , officials said , and some housing and community-development funds may be shifted from other programs or made available for emergency use .
another federal agency not normally associated with disaster relief -- the internal revenue service -- moved quickly as well .
the irs said it will waive certain tax penalties for earthquake victims unable to meet return deadlines or make payments because of the quake 's devastation .
the agency plans to announce specific relief procedures in the coming days .
and the treasury said residents of the san francisco area will be able to cash in savings bonds even if they have n't held them for the minimum six-month period .
one advantage that federal officials have in handling earthquake relief is the large number of military facilities in the san francisco bay area , facilities that provide a ready base of supplies and workers .
even before the full extent of the devastation was known , defense secretary dick cheney ordered the military services to set up an emergency command center in the pentagon and prepare to respond to various fema requests for assistance .
by yesterday afternoon , air force transport planes began moving additional rescue and medical supplies , physicians , communications equipment and fema personnel to california .
a military jet flew a congressional delegation and senior bush administration officials to survey the damage .
and the pentagon said dozens of additional crews and transport aircraft were on alert `` awaiting orders to move emergency supplies .
'' two air force facilities near sacramento , and travis air force base , 50 miles northeast of san francisco , were designated to serve as medical-airlift centers .
some victims also were treated at the letterman army medical center in san francisco and at the naval hospital in oakland .
in addition , 20 military police from the presidio , a military base in san francisco , are assisting with traffic control , and a navy ship was moved from a naval station at treasure island near the bay bridge to san francisco to help fight fires .
to help residents in northern california rebuild , fema intends to set up 17 disaster assistance offices in the earthquake area in the next several days and to staff them with 400 to 500 workers from various agencies , said robert volland , chief of the agency 's individual assistance division .
at these offices , earthquake victims will be helped in filling out a one-page form that they will need to qualify for such federal assistance as home-improvement loans and to repair houses .
and federal officials are promising to move rapidly with federal highway aid to rebuild the area 's severely damaged road system .
the federal highway administration has an emergency relief program to help states and local governments repair federally funded highways and bridges seriously damaged by natural disasters .
the account currently has $ 220 million .
and though federal law dictates that only $ 100 million can be disbursed from that fund in any one state per disaster , administration officials expect congress to move in to authorize spending more now in california .
to get that money , states must go through an elaborate approval process , but officials expect red tape to be cut this time .
keith mulrooney , special assistant to federal highway administrator thomas larson , also said that after the 1971 san fernando earthquake in southern california , the state set tougher standards for bridges , and with federal aid , began a program to retrofit highways and bridges for earthquake hazards .
the first phase of the program has been completed , but two other phases are continuing .
the two major structures that failed tuesday night , he said , were both built well before the 1971 earthquake -- the san francisco bay bridge , completed in the 1930s , and the section of i-880 , built in the 1950s .
the i-880 section had completed the first phase of the retrofitting .
laurie mcginley contributed to this article .
farmers reap abundant crops .
but how much will shoppers benefit ? the harvest arrives in plenty after last year 's drought-ravaged effort : the government estimates corn output at 7.45 billion bushels , up 51 % from last fall .
soybean production swells 24 % .
as a result , prices paid to farmers for the commodities , which are used in products as diverse as bubble gum and chicken feed , plummet 20 % to 33 % .
but do n't expect too much in the way of price breaks soon at the supermarket .
economists expect consumer food prices to jump 5.5 % this year to the highest level since 1980 and up from last year 's 4.1 % rise .
next year may see a drop of one percentage point .
beef prices , hovering near records since the drought , could drop in earnest this winter if ranchers expand herds .
lower feed prices may help animals eat more cheaply , but humans have to factor in an expensive middleman : the processor .
food companies probably wo n't cut their prices much , blaming other costs .
`` labor takes the biggest single chunk out of the ` food dollar , ' '' says frank pankyo of the food institute .
stokely says stores revive specials like three cans of peas for 99 cents .
two cans cost 89 cents during the drought .
if in vitro fertilization works , it usually does so after only a few tries .
costly infertility problems and procedures proliferate as aging baby boomers and others decide to have children -- now .
it 's estimated that one in six couples experiences infertility , and in 1987 , americans spent about $ 1 billion to fight the problem .
only about five states now offer some form of insurance coverage , but more are expected .
a letter in the new england journal of medicine notes that while technology offers `` almost endless hope ... when to stop has become a difficult question ... .
'' the authors , from boston 's beth israel hospital , say that 84 % of the 50 births they followed occurred after only two in vitro cycles .
it adds that births were `` extremely unlikely '' after the fourth cycle and concludes couples who do n't achieve a pregnancy after four to six procedures should be advised that success is unlikely .
some couples continue to try .
`` such determination may translate into extreme physical , emotional and financial costs , '' the letter warns .
market moves , these managers do n't .
only three of the 25 corporate pension fund managers attending a lowry consulting group client conference say they plan to change the asset allocation mix in their portfolios because of the market drop .
world oddities come alive in a multimedia version of the guinness book of records .
the $ 99 cd-rom disk -lrb- it can only be played on an apple macintosh computer at the moment -rrb- combines animation , music and sound .
among the guinness disk 's wonders : the world 's loudest recorded belch .
arty fax from david hockney begins a tongue-in-cheek exhibit today at new york 's andre emmerich gallery .
one of the artist 's earliest fax works was `` little stanley sleeping , '' a portrait of his dog .
pacs give and receive in a debatable duet with employees ' favored charities .
the federal election commission clears corporate plans to donate to an employee 's chosen charity in exchange for the worker 's gift to the company political action committee .
latest approvals : bell atlantic 's new jersey bell and general dynamics .
companies get more political clout plus a possible tax-deductible charitable donation -- so far no word from the irs on deductibility .
detroit edison , the plan pioneer , generated $ 54,000 in matching funds this year , up from $ 39,000 in 1988 .
but the utility may not continue next year .
`` we 're on a tight budget , '' says detroit edison 's carol roskind .
two election commission members opposed the matching plans .
scott e. thomas says the plans give employees `` a bonus in the form of charitable donations made from an employer 's treasury '' in exchange for the political donation .
`` the u.s. government could be , in effect , subsidizing political contributions to corporate pacs , '' he says .
new jersey bell awaits state clearance .
despite federal approval , general dynamics says it decided it wo n't go ahead with the matching program .
christmas shoppers find a helping hand from some catalog companies .
blunt ellis & loewi estimates direct mail catalog sales rose to $ 12 billion last year .
and while it 's too soon to tell how sales will fare in the important 1989 christmas season , some companies take steps to ease the usual 11th-hour crush .
spiegel promises a `` guaranteed christmas , '' with a pledge to deliver goods before christmas if ordered by dec. 20 .
and , for an extra $ 6 , land 's end will deliver orders within two days ; customers can designate the day .
spiegel , which also owns eddie bauer and honeybee , says that since 1987 , sales have doubled during the week before christmas .
an l.l. bean spokeswoman notes : `` people are just used to living in a last-minute society .
'' blunt ellis , a milwaukee brokerage firm , says part of the reason catalog sales grow in popularity is because consumers have more money but less time to spend it .
l.l. bean hires about 2,700 workers for the season rush , about 300 more than last year ; land 's end hires 2,000 .
briefs : guarana antarctica , a brazilian soft drink , is brought to the u.s. by amcap , chevy chase , md .
new product news says the beverage `` looks like ginger ale , tastes a little like cherries and smells like bubble gum .
'' ... `` amenities '' planned for chicago 's new parkshore tower apartments include an on-site investment counselor .
four years ago , pittsburgh was designated the most-livable u.s. city by rand mcnally 's places rated almanac , and the honor did wonders to improve pittsburgh 's soot-stained image .
`` people asked , is it really true ? '' says maury kelley , vice president , marketing services , for beecham products usa , a maker of health and personal-care products that used the ranking in its recruiting brochure .
yuba city , calif. , meanwhile , ranked dead last among 329 metro areas .
unamused , residents burned rand mcnally books and wore t-shirts that said : `` kiss my atlas .
'' the almanac will be making new friends and enemies on oct. 27 , when an updated version will be released .
pittsburgh figures it will be dethroned but plans to accept its ouster graciously .
the city 's office of promotion plans media events to welcome its successor .
`` we 're encouraging a graceful transition , '' says mary kay poppenberg , the organization 's president .
`` our attitude is that -lrb- the ranking -rrb- is like miss america .
once you 're miss america , you 're always miss america .
'' tell that to atlanta , which pittsburgh replaced as the most-livable city in 1985 .
many atlantans thought pittsburgh was an unworthy heir .
a columnist in the atlanta journal and constitution wrote : `` who did the research for this report ? two guys from gary , ind. ? '' not so .
co-authors david savageau and richard boyer , live in gloucester , mass. , and asheville , n.c. , respectively .
`` atlanta , '' mr. savageau sniffs , `` has unrealistic pretensions to world-class status .
'' the new edition lists the top 10 metropolitan areas as anaheim-santa ana , calif. ; boston ; louisville , ky. ; nassau-suffolk , n.y. ; new york ; pittsburgh ; san diego ; san francisco ; seattle ; and washington .
mr. savageau says earthquake or not , san francisco makes the list .
but attention also rivets on who finishes last , and pine bluff , ark. -- which finished third to last in 1981 and second to last in 1985 -- is certainly in the running .
`` i hate to dignify the publication by commenting on the obscene rating , '' mayor carolyn robinson says , adding that cities have no way to rebut the book .
`` it 's like fighting your way out of a fog .
you do n't know which way to punch .
northrop corp. 's third-quarter net income fell 25 % to $ 21.5 million , or 46 cents a share , while general dynamics corp. reported nearly flat earnings of $ 76.5 million , or $ 1.83 a share .
los angeles-based northrop recorded an 8.2 % decline in sales as b-2 stealth bomber research-and-development revenue continued to ebb and high costs on some other programs cut into profit .
the aerospace concern earned $ 28.8 million , or 61 cents a share , a year earlier .
sales in the latest period were $ 1.25 billion , down from $ 1.36 billion in the 1988 quarter .
at st. louis-based general dynamics , sales rose 10 % to $ 2.52 billion from $ 2.29 billion .
it earned $ 76.4 million , or $ 1.82 a share , in the 1988 quarter .
general dynamics credited significant earnings gains in its general aviation and material service segments , an earnings recovery in submarine operations , and higher military aircraft sales .
northrop said sales fell because of the decline in b-2 development dollars from the government as the plane continues its initial production stage and because fewer f/a-18 fighter sections are being produced in its subcontract work with prime contractor mcdonnell douglas corp .
in composite trading on the new york stock exchange , northrop shares closed at $ 21.125 , off 25 cents .
general dynamics closed at $ 54.875 , up 50 cents .
northrop , which since early 1988 has declined to accept fixed-price contracts for research and development , said earnings were hurt by excessive costs on a number of such contracts won years ago .
among them were the alq-135 electronic countermeasures system for the f-15 fighter .
northrop 's interest expense also soared to $ 35 million from $ 17 million a year ago .
it said debt remained at the $ 1.22 billion that has prevailed since early 1989 , although that compared with $ 911 million at sept. 30 , 1988 .
the backlog of undelivered orders at northrop on sept. 30 was $ 4.68 billion , down from $ 5.16 billion a year earlier .
for the nine months , northrop reported a net loss of $ 46.9 million , or $ 1 a share , compared with profit of $ 190.3 million , or $ 4.05 a share , in 1988 .
sales dipped 3.6 % to $ 3.92 billion from $ 4.07 billion .
at general dynamics , factors reducing earnings in the military aircraft segment included higher levels of cost-sharing in development of the advanced tactical fighter , and the high cost of an advanced version of the f-16 fighter .
f-16 deliveries also have fallen `` slightly behind schedule , '' although a return to the previous schedule is expected in 1990 , the company said .
backlog at general dynamics rose to $ 16.5 billion from $ 15.8 billion .
its interest expense surged to $ 21.5 million from $ 12.4 million .
for the nine months , general dynamics earned $ 210.3 million , or $ 5.03 a share , up marginally from $ 208.8 million , or $ 4.97 a share , on a 4.9 % rise in sales to $ 7.41 billion from $ 7.06 billion .
lotus development corp. reported a surprisingly strong 51 % increase in third-quarter net income on a 32 % sales gain , buoyed by strong demand for a new version of its 1-2-3 computer spreadsheet .
the results topped analysts ' expectations and the earnings growth of competitors , prompting traders to all but forget the product-launch delays that bogged down the company for much of the past two years .
yesterday , in heavy , national over-the-counter trading , lotus shares rose to $ 32.50 , up $ 1.25 apiece , capping a threemonth run-up of more than 40 % .
lotus said net rose to $ 23 million , or 54 cents a share , on sales of $ 153.9 million .
a year ago , net was $ 14.3 million , or 31 cents a share , on sales of $ 116.8 million .
for the nine months , net of $ 38.5 million , or 92 cents a share , trailed the year earlier 's $ 49.9 million , or $ 1.08 a share .
sales rose to $ 406 million from $ 356 million the year earlier .
in the first half , lotus struggled to keep market share with costly promotions while customers awaited the launch of 1-2-3 release 3 , the upgraded spreadsheet software .
lotus 's results were about 10 % higher than analysts ' average expectations and compared favorably with the 36 % earnings rise reported a day earlier by rival microsoft corp. of redmond , wash .
the company said results were bolstered by upgrades to release 3 by previous customers and improved profit margins , the result of manufacturing-cost controls .
rick sherlund , a goldman sachs analyst , said lotus had upgrade revenue of about $ 22 million in the quarter , twice what he had expected .
also , he estimated unit shipments of 1-2-3 in all its forms were about 315,000 , up 7 % from 1988 's quarterly average .
demand for the new version was enabling lotus to raise prices with distributors and to hold market share against microsoft and other competitors that tried to exploit the earlier delays in release 3 's launch , mr. sherlund added .
he estimated that 1-2-3 outsold microsoft 's excel spreadsheet by four-to-one in the quarter , and held a 70 % or better share of the spreadsheet market .
silicon valley heaved a sigh of relief yesterday .
though details were sketchy in the aftermath of the violent earthquake that shook the high-tech corridor along with the rest of the san francisco bay area , a spot check of computer makers turned up little , if any , potentially lingering damage to facilities or fabrication equipment .
analysts and corporate officials said they expected practically no long-term disruption in shipments from the valley of either hardware or software goods .
intel corp. , advanced micro devices inc. and national semiconductor corp. were all up and running yesterday , though many workers were forced to stay home because of damaged roadways ; others elected to take the day off .
`` these systems are more rugged than many people would believe , '' said thomas kurlak , who tracks the computer industry for merrill lynch research .
`` it 's not the end of the world if you shake them up a little bit .
'' other companies , including international business machines corp. and hewlett-packard co. , completely idled their operations because of tuesday evening 's temblor , which registered 6.9 on the richter scale .
personnel spent the morning inspecting buildings for structural weaknesses , mopping up water from broken pipes and clearing ceiling tiles and other debris from factory floors .
still , many were confident that `` in a day or two , everything should be back to normal , '' according to a spokeswoman for the semiconductor industry association , based in cupertino .
ibm , for instance , said it anticipates returning to a normal work schedule by the weekend at its san jose plant , which puts out disk drives for the 3090 family of mainframes .
a hewlett-packard spokeswoman said that , while `` things are a big mess , '' some 18,000 valley employees have been called back to work today .
apple computer added that it was being `` cautiously optimistic , '' despite not yet closely eyeballing all of its 50 buildings in the region .
even the carefully calibrated machinery in its giant fremont plant , to the north of the valley , was believed to be undamaged .
sun microsystems inc. and tandem computers inc. also signaled that they should recover quickly .
digital equipment corp. , with major facilities in santa clara , cupertino , palo alto and mountain view , said that all of its engineering and manufacturing sites had reported to corporate headquarters in maynard , mass. , tuesday night .
none sustained `` significant '' damage , a spokesman said , adding that `` the delicate manufacturing process machines were checked and were all found to be operating normally .
'' for many companies , of course , there is still a slew of nagging problems to grapple with , some of which have the potential to become quite serious .
for example , a spokesman for advanced micro devices said the sunnyvale chip maker is worried about blackouts .
a sudden surge or drop in electric power could ruin integrated circuits being built .
but , given what might have happened to the fragile parts that are at the heart of the microelectronics business , the bulk of valley companies seemed to be just about shouting hosannas .
several factors apparently spared the valley -- a sprawling suburban stretch from san jose to palo alto -- from the kind of impact felt in san francisco , an hour 's drive north .
for one thing , buildings there tend to be newer and , thus , in step with the latest safety codes .
also , the soil in the valley is solid , unlike the landfill of san francisco 's downtown marina district , which was hit with fires and vast destruction .
in addition , some microelectronics companies said they were prepared for tremulous conditions like tuesday 's .
their machine tools are even bolted to the shop floor .
intel said that over the past decade , it has installed computer sensors and shutoff valves , sensitive to the shake of an earthquake , in the pipes that snake through its plants .
like other large valley companies , intel also noted that it has factories in several parts of the nation , so that a breakdown at one location should n't leave customers in a total pinch .
that 's certainly good news for such companies as compaq computer corp. , houston , which has only a four-day supply of microprocessors from the valley on hand because of a just-in-time manufacturing approach that limits the buildup of inventory .
compaq said it foresees no difficulties in obtaining parts in the immediate future .
computer makers were scrambling to help customers recover from the disaster .
digital equipment has set up disaster-recovery response centers in dallas , atlanta and colorado springs , colo .
these units were handling calls both from people in the san francisco area and from computers themselves , which are set to dial digital automatically when trouble arises .
they then run remotely controlled self-diagnostic programs .
digital also said it has dispatched teams of technicians to california .
meanwhile , several other major installations around the valley -- america 's center of high-tech -- said they , too , fared as well as could be expected .
lawrence livermore national laboratory , where the energy department tests and conducts research on nuclear weapons , had only `` superficial damage , '' a spokesman said .
at lockheed corp. 's missiles and space systems group in sunnyvale , about 40 miles south of san francisco , workers were asked to head to work yesterday after it was realized that `` there were no show-stoppers '' in the 150-plus buildings on its one-square-mile campus .
several engineering and research offices needed closer scrutiny to make sure they were n't in danger of crumbling , but `` the bulk of the place is in pretty good shape , '' an official said .
one of lockheed 's most lucrative sectors -- accounting for more than half the aerospace company 's $ 10.59 billion in sales in 1988 -- the missiles and space group is the prime pentagon contractor on the trident ii ballistic missile .
it also generates pieces of the missile shield called the strategic defense initiative .
fortunately , the hubble space telescope -- set to be launched on the shuttle next year in a search for distant solar systems and light emitted 14 billion years ago from the farthest reaches of the universe -- was moved from sunnyvale to the kennedy space center in florida at the beginning of october .
john r. wilke contribued to this article .
michael maynard offered the world a faster way to break eggs .
as thanks , the egg industry tried to break him .
and the egg producers have done a pretty good job .
they tried to put mr. maynard out of business by an act of congress .
egg-industry lobbying helped persuade six states to ban mr. maynard 's automatic egg-breaking machine because of fears over salmonella .
his company , misa manufacturing inc. , was forced to seek protection from creditors under federal bankruptcy law in 1987 and has since been liquidated .
monthly sales of his egg king machine -- which he now is marketing through a new company -- have sunk to about half a dozen from a peak of 75 , says the 46-year-old businessman .
mr. maynard is n't the first entrepreneur to bump up against entrenched interests .
but his case is notable both for the scale of the fight -- it is n't often that a congressional hearing is held to determine whether one small businessman is a threat to the republic -- and for what it tells about the pitfalls of marketing a new product .
now one might ask why people who sell eggs would fight someone who is trying to make it easier to crack them .
part of the answer lies in the nature of the industry .
many larger egg producers are also egg processors , who crack , inspect , and sanitize billions of eggs , turning them into powdered , liquified or frozen egg products .
however , dozens of bakers , restaurant chefs and other food preparers who flocked to mr. maynard 's defense say that products ranging from egg bread to eclairs lose some zip when the eggs come in 30-pound cans instead of shells .
but for companies that use hundreds of eggs a day , breaking them by hand can get , well , out of hand .
the idea behind the egg king is pretty simple : put the eggs into a cylinder that contains perforated baskets , spin them at a high speed to break the shells and strain the edible part through the baskets .
one egg king -- which at just under four feet tall and two feet wide has been likened to the robot r2-d2 -- can crack about 20,000 eggs an hour .
because fresh eggs are less expensive than processed ones , a big egg user can recover the egg king 's $ 3,390 cost in a few months , says mr. maynard .
such centrifugal egg breakers have been around since the 1890s .
but when mr. maynard came forward with his machine in the early 1970s nobody else was offering them in the u.s. .
the main reason : salmonella .
chickens carry this bacteria , which can cause upset stomachs and , in rare cases , death among people .
hens sometimes pass salmonella to the eggs , and it can also be found on unclean shells .
thus , any machine that breaks large amounts of eggs at once has the potential to spread salmonella if a bad egg gets in with the good ones .
mr. maynard claims this is a manageable problem .
the egg king carries written instructions to break only high-grade eggs that have been properly sanitized and , as an added precaution , to use the eggs only in products that will be cooked enough to kill bacteria .
with nearly 4,000 machines in use , there have been no salmonella problems as long as instructions were followed , mr. maynard boasts .
he says the handful of salmonella cases involving products that may have used eggs broken by an egg king stemmed from a failure to adequately cook the products .
but he says that 's no more a reason for banning egg kings than bad drivers are a reason for banning cars .
opponents do n't buy such arguments .
`` human nature being what it is , people do n't always follow instructions , '' says jack guzewich , chief of food protection for the new york state health department .
leading the assault against the egg king has been united egg producers .
the decatur , ga. , trade group has issued a `` briefing book '' that claims the machine is `` a health hazard '' and that mr. maynard is trying `` to make a fast buck at the expense of the nation 's egg producers .
'' the uep declines to comment , but the group 's attorney , alfred frawley , says the group 's actions are motivated solely by `` health concerns .
'' an early battleground was the u.s. department of agriculture .
mr. maynard initially won approval for his machine to be used at egg-processing facilities regulated by the usda 's food safety inspection service .
unfortunately for mr. maynard , another branch of the usda , the agricultural marketing service , was in charge of eggs .
after receiving complaints from egg producers , this branch got the other branch to rescind its approval , thus limiting the machine 's potential market to bakeries and restaurants and other establishments that are n't regulated by the usda .
the egg producers also lobbied the food and drug administration .
but the fda in a 1985 letter to the united egg producers said that there was `` little likelihood '' of a health problem as long as instructions were followed .
so the producers went to capitol hill , where a congressman from georgia introduced a measure to ban centrifugal egg-breaking machines .
mr. maynard , whose company at the time was based in santa ana , calif. , enlisted his local congressman , and the battle was joined .
mr. maynard 's forces finally defeated the measure , though it took a vote on the floor of the house of representatives to do it .
even then , opponents managed to get a congressional hearing to examine what one congressman called an `` unscrupulous '' method for breaking eggs .
foiled in their effort to get a national ban , the egg producers turned their attention to the states .
so far , new york , new jersey , nebraska , georgia , michigan and minnesota have outlawed mr. maynard 's device , citing health concerns .
an antitrust suit that mr. maynard 's company filed in los angeles federal court against the united egg producers and others only added to the entrepreneur 's woes .
the judge dismissed the suit and ordered mr. maynard 's company to pay over $ 100,000 in legal fees to the defendants ' lawyers .
mr. maynard says the ruling pushed his company into bankruptcy court .
now he has moved to oklahoma where costs are lower , and started a new company , adsi inc. , to market his machine .
but , so far , the change of scenery has n't ended his string of bad breaks .
mr. maynard recently fell from a horse and fractured his arm .
michelle pfeiffer ca n't chew gum and sing at the same time .
but on the evidence of `` the fabulous baker boys , '' that may be the only thing she ca n't do , at least when she 's acting in movies .
as the tough , slinky lounge chanteuse in `` the fabulous baker boys , '' ms. pfeiffer sings for herself , and more than passably well .
her susie diamond handles a song the way the greats do , like she 's hearing the way it should sound inside her head and she 's concentrating on matching that internal tone .
yet her intensity stops and starts with the music .
when she is n't performing for an audience , she prepares for a song by removing the wad of gum from her mouth , and indicates that she 's finished by sticking the gum back in .
like almost everything in this wonderfully romantic and edgy movie , ms. pfeiffer 's susie seems like someone you 've seen before , in numerous show-biz stories -lrb- even her name , susie diamond , sounds like a character marilyn monroe must have played -rrb- .
yet nothing about `` baker boys , '' and certainly nothing about ms. pfeiffer , really is like something from the video vault .
steve kloves , the young writer and director -lrb- he is n't yet 30 -rrb- , has only one produced picture to his credit ; he wrote the screenplay for `` racing with the moon , '' a lovely coming-of-age picture set in the '40s .
both movies are infused with the nostalgic sensibility of someone much older , someone who does n't dismiss dreams , but who also has enough experience to see his limits .
however , mr. kloves directs his own material without sentimentality and at its own eccentric pace ; `` baker boys '' is both bluesy and funny .
he 's put a fresh spin on material that could come off terribly cliched ; for example , the way susie wows an audience the first time she sings with the baker boys .
of course , it does n't hurt that mr. kloves has made up for his lack of experience behind the camera with technicians who know exactly what they 're doing .
much of the picture 's sensuality emerges from cinematographer michael ballhaus 's slyly seductive lens work .
after working for years with werner rainer fassbinder , the late german director , and more recently with martin scorsese -lrb- `` after hours , '' `` the color of money , '' `` the last temptation of christ '' -rrb- , mr. ballhaus has developed a distinctively fluid style .
and dave grusin 's witty score embraces the banal requirements of banquet-hall musicianship -lrb- `` feelings '' is a must -rrb- without condescension .
though ms. pfeiffer has the flashy part -- she gets the best comic bits and to wear glamorous dresses and spiked heels the boys are pretty great , too .
what seemed like a good idea , to cast the bridges brothers -lrb- jeff and beau -rrb- as the baker brothers , actually turned out to be a good idea .
anyone who 's tried to appear `` natural '' in front of a camera knows that it 's much more natural to end up looking like a stiff .
so it 's quite possible that the terrific play between the brothers is n't natural at all , that jeff and beau had to work like crazy to make their brotherly love -- and resentment and frustration and rage -- seem so very real .
when the movie opens the baker brothers are doing what they 've done for 15 years professionally , and twice as long as that for themselves : they 're playing proficient piano , face-to-face , on twin pianos .
they 're small time in the small time-hotels -lrb- not the best ones -rrb- and restaurants in seattle .
yet they do n't disparage their audiences by disparaging their act .
they wear tuxedos most nights , unless circumstances -lrb- a regular gig at a `` tropical '' lounge , for example -rrb- require them to wear special costumes , like hawaiian shirts .
plump beau , looking eager to please with his arched eyebrows and round face , plays the older brother , frank .
frank plans the program , takes care of business , and approaches the work like any other job .
he 's even able to think of a job that takes him out of the house 300 nights a week as an ordinary job .
he 's got a wife and two kids and a house in the suburbs ; the audience sees only the house , and only near the end of the movie .
frank grovels a little for the bookers , probably no more or less than he would have to if he worked for a big corporation .
on his off-hours he wears cardigan sweaters .
jeff bridges is the younger brother , jack , who fancies himself the rebellious artist ; he lives in a loft with his sick dog and the occasional visit from the little girl upstairs , who climbs down the fire escape .
yet jack 's the one who can remember every dive they ever played , and when , and he dutifully shows up for work night after night -lrb- he consoles himself with booze and by showing up at the last minute -rrb- .
looking leaner than he has in a while , the younger mr. bridges 's jack is sexy and cynical and a far sadder case than frank , who 's managed to chisel his dreams to fit reality without feeling too cheated .
he can live with little pleasures .
mr. kloves has put together some priceless moments .
these include jennifer tilly 's audition to be the baker boys ' girl singer .
ms. tilly of the tweety-bird voice showed great comic promise during her stint as the mobster 's girlfriend on the television show , `` hill street blues .
'' here she delivers , especially during her enthusiastically awful rendition of the `` candy man , '' which she sings while prancing around in a little cotton candy pink angora sweater that could n't be more perfect .
-lrb- it matches her voice .
-rrb- and ms. pfeiffer 's particular version of `` making whoopee '' -- and the way mr. ballhaus photographs her , from the tips of her red high heels right up her clingy red velvet dress -- might make you think of marilyn monroe if ms. pfeiffer had n't gone and become a star in her own right .
video tip : if you 'd like to see the first time michelle pfeiffer sang on screen , and you have a lot of patience , take a look at `` grease 2 .
'' you 'll find her there .
better yet , check out the emergence of her comic persona in `` married to the mob , '' jonathan demme 's delightful mafia comedy .
international proteins corp. definitively agreed to pay $ 49 million and 2,850,000 of its shares for hanson plc 's ground round restaurant subsidiary .
shareholders of international proteins , a food and agriproducts company , will vote on the transaction at a meeting late next month .
hanson is a london producer of consumer and other goods .
international proteins shares did n't trade yesterday on the american stock exchange .
they closed tuesday in composite trading at $ 13.625 , down 37.5 cents , giving the stock portion of the transaction an indicated value of $ 38.8 million .
control data corp. agreed to sell its idle supercomputer manufacturing plant here to minnesota mining & manufacturing co. for $ 5.8 million .
the tentative agreement calls for 3m to use the 115,000-square-foot plant and 19 acres of land for research laboratories .
control data has been seeking a buyer for the facility since it folded its eta systems inc. supercomputer unit this past april .
general dynamics corp. was awarded contracts totaling $ 589 million for one navy trident submarine and for air force research on the national aerospace plane .
grumman corp. won a $ 58.9 million navy contract for 12 f-14 aircraft .
raytheon co. was issued a $ 19.2 million air force contract for support of the milstar communications satellite .
mcdonnell douglas corp. got a $ 12.5 million air force contract for support work on the national aerospace plane .
denis c. smith was named to the new post of vice president of world-wide advanced materials operations for this chemicals concern .
mr. smith , 50 years old , was formerly responsible for advanced materials , which include plastic composites and alloys , in north america only .
himont is 81%-owned by montedison s.p .
a. of milan , italy .
galveston-houston co. said it will redeem all 3,950 shares of its privately held 6.5 % convertible series c preferred stock nov. 8 .
holders can either convert each share into 421 shares of the company 's common stock , or surrender their shares at the per-share price of $ 1,000 , plus accumulated dividends of $ 6.71 a share .
galveston-houston makes and markets products for the construction , mining and energy industries .
bank building & equipment corp. of america , which previously said accounting discrepancies its auditors uncovered would hurt earnings and require restatement of earlier results , increased its projections of the negative fiscal impact , and said it was exploring the company 's sale .
bank building , which builds and equips banks , had announced it would restate the first-three quarters of this fiscal year , which ends oct. 31 .
on oct. 5 , the company estimated after-tax effects on the year 's earnings would be `` at least '' $ 1.3 million .
yesterday , the company said the negative after-tax effect on earnings for the year will be about $ 3.3 million .
for the nine months ended july 31 , bank building had a net loss of $ 1 million , on revenue of $ 66.5 million .
bank building , which expects to report a fourth-quarter loss , said it engaged advisers to `` explore financial alternatives for the company including the possible sale of the company or one or more of its units .
'' company auditors are continuing their review , and final restated figures are n't yet available .
bank building earlier said the restatement is necessitated by `` certain errors in recording receivables and payables '' at its loughman cabinet division .
that division 's manager has been fired .
in american stock exchange composite trading , bank building closed at $ 4 a share , down 62.5 cents .
gen. paul x. kelley , retired commandant of the u.s. marine corps , was elected a director of this plastics , specialty materials and aerospace concern , succeeding jewel lafontant , who resigned to accept a government position .
rep. mary rose oakar -lrb- d. , ohio -rrb- at last week 's hearings on irregularities in programs at the department of housing and urban development : i do n't want to feel guilty representing my constituents .
and if i think that some people -lcb- on hud secretary jack kemp 's -rcb- staff are off base in terms in which they 're evaluating certain things affecting my hometown , i have to tell you something -- i 'm not going to take it .
i think that i 'm elected to represent the people that sent me here .
and one of our charges is to be an ombudsman for our area .
and if we 're not ombudsman for our area , we ought to be thrown out of office .
on the other hand , if we 're asking for something unreasonable or unethical and so on , then that 's a whole different story .
but if i feel that there are situations where i 'm trying to get housing for our area -- whatever it happens to be -- and i have to feel that i ca n't even ask a question , i 've got to tell you , i think that 's outrageous .
.
i think these regulations that would prohibit well-operated programs in areas across this country would be wrong to change ... .
i do n't want to see some guidelines change that 's going to inhibit my city 's opportunity to use its money .
the chicago mercantile exchange said it fined capcom futures inc. $ 500,000 and accepted its withdrawal from membership as part of a settlement of disciplinary actions against the firm .
capcom futures is a chicago subsidiary of capcom financial services ltd. , a london financial firm that was implicated last year in a scheme to launder drug money .
the case is pending .
the firm was indicted in tampa , fla. , on money-laundering charges .
in june , the chicago board of trade said it suspended capcom financial .
the capcom futures unit withdrew from board of trade membership voluntarily in august , a board of trade spokesman said .
capcom futures , while neither admitting nor denying the merc charges , said in a statement that the merc charges were `` technical in nature '' and that `` no customers were hurt '' as a result of the violations cited by the merc .
the merc alleged that , among other things , from april 1987 through october 1988 capcom futures failed to document trades between capcom futures and people or entities directly or indirectly controlled by capcom futures shareholders .
frederick w. lang , 65 years old , the founder of this software services concern , was elected to the new post of chairman .
formerly president and treasurer , mr. lang remains chief executive officer .
victor c. benda , 58 , formerly executive vice president , succeeds mr. lang as president and becomes chief operating officer , a new post .
maurice warren , 56-year-old group managing director , was named chief executive officer of this food and agriculture group .
the post of chief executive has been vacant since july when terry pryce , 55 , left the company .
money-market mutual fund assets grew at nearly three times their usual rate in the latest week , as investors opted for safety instead of the stock market .
money-fund assets soared $ 4.5 billion in the week ended tuesday , to a record $ 348.4 billion , according to ibc/donoghue 's money fund report , a holliston , mass.-based newsletter .
`` we were expecting it , following the fall of the dow friday , '' said brenda malizia negus , editor of money fund report .
`` it 's the proverbial flight to safety .
'' despite recent declines in interest rates , money funds continue to offer better yields than other comparable investments .
the average seven-day compound yield on the 400 taxable funds tracked by ibc/donoghue 's was 8.55 % in the latest week , down from 8.60 % .
compound yields assume reinvestment of dividends and that current yields continue for a year .
most short-term certificates of deposit are yielding about 8 % or less at major banks , and the yields on treasury bills sold at monday 's auction fell to 7.61 % for three months and 7.82 % for six months .
money-fund assets have been rising at an average rate of $ 1.6 billion a week in recent months , ms. negus said , reflecting the relatively high yields .
in the latest week , funds open to institutions alone grew by $ 1.8 billion .
some fund managers say inflows could increase in coming days as a result of stock selling in the wake of friday 's 190.58 point drop in the dow jones industrial average .
`` if you 're selling equities , you do n't start getting proceeds for five to seven days , '' said frank rachwalski , who manages the kemper money market fund .
neal litvack , marketing vice president for fidelity investments , said inflows friday into fidelity 's spartan and cash reserves money-market funds were about twice normal levels , with about half coming from equity and junk-bond funds .
monday and tuesday `` were lackluster in comparison , '' he said .
`` people are n't necessarily running scared , '' mr. litvack said .
`` they 're maintaining their attitude toward investing , which has leaned toward the conservative recently .
'' money-fund yields tend to lag interestrate trends as portfolio managers adjust the maturities of their investments -- short-term treasury securities , commercial paper and the like -- to capture the highest yields .
maturities usually are shorter when rates are rising and longer when they are falling .
the average maturity of the funds tracked by ibc/donoghue 's remained at 38 days for the third consecutive week .
it was as short as 29 days at the start of this year , when rates were marching steadily upward , and hit 42 days in august .
the average seven-day simple yield of the funds fell to 8.21 % this week from 8.26 % .
the average 30-day simple yield was 8.26 % , compared with 8.27 % the week before , and the 30-day compound yield slid to 8.60 % from 8.61 % .
some funds are posting yields far higher than the average .
the highest yielding taxable fund this week was harbor money market fund , with a seven-day compound yield of 12.75 % .
that included capital gains that were passed along to customers .
among the other high-yielding funds , fidelity 's spartan fund had a seven-day compound yield of 9.33 % in the latest week .
the seven-day compound yield of the dreyfus worldwide dollar fund was 9.51 % .
whose della femina mcnamee wcrs agency created liar joe isuzu , among others -- announced a massive restructuring that largely removes it from the advertising business and includes selling the majority of its advertising unit to paris-based eurocom .
the complex restructuring , which was long expected , transforms london-based wcrs from primarily a creator of advertising into one of europe 's largest buyers of advertising time and space .
it also creates a newly merged world-wide ad agency controlled by eurocom and headed jointly by new york ad man jerry della femina and two top wcrs executives .
the merged agency 's admittedly ambitious goal : to become one of the world 's 10 largest agencies , while attracting more multinational clients than the agencies were able to attract alone .
wcrs 's restructuring reflects the growing importance of media buying in europe , where the only way to get a good price on advertising time and space is to buy it in bulk .
for eurocom , meanwhile , the move gives it a strong u.s. foothold in della femina , and more than quadruples the size of its ad agency business world-wide .
it also gives the outspoken mr. della femina -- who often generates as much publicity for himself as for his clients -- an international platform that he most certainly wo n't be loath to use .
according to terms , wcrs will pay 2.02 billion french francs -lrb- $ 318.6 million -rrb- for the 50 % it does n't already own of carat holding s.a. , one of europe 's largest media buyers .
meanwhile , eurocom , which had held 20 % of wcrs 's ad unit , will pay # 43.5 million -lrb- $ 68.5 million -rrb- to raise its stake to 60 % .
that price also covers eurocom raising to 60 % its 51 % stake in europe 's belier group , a joint venture ad agency network it owns with wcrs .
eurocom will also have the right to buy the remaining 40 % of the merged ad agency group in six years .
the transaction places the three executives squarely at the helm of a major agency with the rather unwieldy name of eurocom wcrs della femina ball ltd. , or ewdb .
the merged agency will include della femina mcnamee based in new york , eurocom 's various agencies in france , the belier group in europe and wcrs 's other advertising and direct marketing operations .
mr. della femina will be joint chairman with former wcrs executive robin wight .
both will report to tim breene , a former wcrs executive who will be chief executive officer at the new agency .
in an interview in new york , mr. breene , fresh from a concorde flight from paris where executives had worked through most of the night , outlined big plans for the new agency .
`` our goal is to develop quite rapidly to a top-10 position ... by the end of three years from now .
it implies very dramatic growth , '' he said .
he added that eurocom and wcrs had agreed to provide a development fund of # 100 million for acquisitions .
the new agency group is already in discussions about a possible purchase in spain , while mr. breene said it also plans to make acquisitions in scandinavia , germany and elsewhere .
cracking the top 10 within three years will be difficult at best .
della femina had billings of just $ 660 million last year and ranked as the u.s. 's 24th-largest ad agency .
the merged company that it now becomes part of will have billings of just more than $ 2.6 billion -- most of that in europe -- bringing it to about 14th world-wide .
to make it to top-10 status , it would have to leapfrog over such formidable forces as grey advertising , d'arcy masius benton & bowles and omnicom 's ddb needham .
the merged agency 's game plan to attract multinational packaged-goods advertisers may prove equally difficult .
when wcrs created della femina mcnamee out of the merger of three smaller agency units in 1988 , it said it did so in order to attract larger clients , especially packaged-goods companies .
since then , della femina won pan am as an international client and also does work for a few packaged-goods clients , including dow chemical co. 's saran wrap .
but major packaged-goods players of the world -- such as procter & gamble , colgate-palmolive and unilever -- have steadfastly eluded the agency .
`` three of our favorite names , '' mr. della femina calls that roster , adding hopefully , `` we 're a much more attractive agency to large multinationals today than we were yesterday .
'' still , the restructuring could create one of the most powerful alliances between advertising and media-buying firms that europe has seen .
as part of the restructuring , wcrs and eurocom said they will look for ways to combine their media buying across europe .
what 's more , both eurocom and brothers francis and gilbert gross , who founded carat , will acquire 14.99 % stakes in wcrs group , creating a powerful link between eurocom and carat .
carat will receive its wcrs stake as part of payment for the 50 % carat stake that wcrs is buying , while eurocom said it expects to pay about # 32 million for its wcrs stake .
mr. della femina says he plans to remain heavily involved in the creative product at the world-wide agency , serving as a sort of `` creative conscience .
'' louise mcnamee , della femina 's president , will continue running the u.s. agency day-to-day .
they and other top executives signed long-term employment contracts and mr. della femina will receive an additional multimillion-dollar sum , which some industry executives pegged at about $ 10 million .
wcrs group , for its part , will now be able to follow its longstanding plan of becoming `` a holding company for a series of media-related businesses , '' said peter scott , the firm 's chief executive .
in addition to carat , wcrs will hold onto its public relations , tv programming and other businesses .
wcrs says its debt will be cut to # 24 million from # 66 million as a result of the transaction .
for carat , meanwhile , the alliance with eurocom and wcrs is intended to strengthen its own push outside france .
carat 's gross brothers invented the idea of large-scale buying of media space .
by buying the space in bulk , they obtain discounts as high as 50 % , which they can pass on to customers .
they thus have won the french space-buying business of such advertising giants as coca-cola co. , fiat s.p .
a. , gillette and kodak .
but now , other agencies are getting into the business with their own competing media-buying groups -- and carat wants to expand to the rest of europe .
to help finance the carat purchase , wcrs said it plans an issue of euroconvertible preferred shares once the market settles down .
but wcrs added that `` in the light of the current uncertainty in the equity markets , '' it has arranged medium-term debt financing , which would be underwritten by samuel montagu & co. ltd .
earthquake 's damage tuesday 's earthquake brought the san francisco ad scene to a screeching halt yesterday , with only a few staffers showing up at their offices , mainly to survey the damage or to wring their hands about imminent new-business presentations .
while no agencies reported injuries to employees , the quake damaged the offices of j. walter thompson , chiat/day/mojo and ddb needham , among others , spokesmen for those agencies said .
staffers at thompson , whose offices are in the ultramodern embarcadero center , watched pictures drop from the walls and then felt the skyscraper sway seven to eight feet , according to a spokeswoman .
plaster fell and windows were broken at chiat/day/mojo , a spokesman for that agency said .
late yesterday afternoon , ddb needham executives were scrambling to figure out what to do about a new business presentation that had been scheduled for today , a spokesman said .
ddb needham 's office building may have sustained structural damage , the spokesman added .
`` all operations have stopped , '' he said .
a number of agencies , including thompson and foote , cone & belding , said some employees who live outside of san francisco , fearful that they would n't be able to get home , spent the night at the agency .
ad notes ... .
new account : chesebrough-pond 's inc. , greenwich , conn. , awarded its faberge hair care accounts to j. walter thompson , new york .
thompson , a unit of wpp group , will handle faberge organic shampoo and conditioner and aqua net hairspray .
the accounts , which billed about $ 7 million last year , according to leading national advertisers , were previously handled at bozell , new york .
who 's news : william morrissey , 44 , was named executive vice president , world-wide director of mccann direct , the direct marketing unit of interpublic group 's mccann-erickson agency .
he had been president and chief operating officer of ogilvy & mather direct .
bozell : los angeles will be the site of a new entertainment division for the ad agency .
the division will be headed by dick porter , who returns to bozell after being vice president of media at mgm .
ac&r advertising : the agency 's three california offices , previously called ac&r/ccl advertising , will now be called ac&r advertising to match the name of its new york office .
ac&r advertising is a unit of saatchi & saatchi co .
new beer : sibra products inc. , greenwich , conn. , awarded its cardinal amber light beer account to heidelberg & associates , new york .
budget is set at $ 1.5 million .
the new beer , introduced this week at a liquor industry convention , is imported from switzerland 's cardinal brewery .
heidelberg 's first ads for the brand , which sibra says will compete with imported light beer leader amstel light , feature the line `` the best tasting light beer you 've ever seen .
diamond-star motors corp. , a joint venture of chrysler corp. and mitsubishi motors corp. said it will begin shipping mitsubishi eclipse cars to japan next week , emulating other japanese auto ventures shipping u.s.-built vehicles back to japan .
diamond-star said it will export about 1,500 eclipse cars to japan by year 's end .
honda motor co. , the first japanese auto maker to ship cars to japan from the u.s. , is now exporting more than 5,000 accord coupes a year from its marysville , ohio , factory .
one of the most remarkable features of the forced marches of the ethnic turks out of bulgaria over the past five months has been the lack of international attention .
the deportation of more than 315,000 men , women and children by the bulgarian regime adds up to one of the largest migrations seen in the postwar years .
yet some people are advancing a chilling casuistry : that what we are seeing is somehow the understandable result of the historical sins committed by the turks in the 16th century .
today 's turks in bulgaria , in other words , deserve what is coming to them four centuries later .
as if this were n't enough , the senate judiciary committee is getting into the act .
on tuesday it approved senator bob dole 's proposed commemorative resolution designating april 24 , 1990 , as the `` national day of remembrance of the 75th anniversary of the armenian genocide of 1915-1923 , '' suffered at the hands of the warring ottoman empire .
there can be no quibbling that the armenians endured terrible suffering , but one has to wonder what possible good such a resolution will achieve .
it puts great strain on a longstanding u.s. friendship with turkey , a country that has been one of america 's strongest allies in nato .
the resolution also comes at a time when turkey has been seeking help from the united states in resolving its bulgarian emigration controversy and pursuing democratic reforms that may lead to membership in the european community .
turkey has been fighting its past for years , and thus far has been only partially successful .
must it now accept that one of its strongest allies blames it for the genocide of another people ? such sentiment only encourages the adverse feelings toward turkey that surfaced when turkey asked for assistance in dealing with its bulgarian emigration crisis .
mr. dole 's odd effort notwithstanding , most of turkey 's political problems lie with the europeans .
part of the problem some europeans have with turkey seems to stem from its location -- turkey is n't really part of europe .
why , they wonder , should it belong to the ec ? another anti-turkish hook is the islamic faith of the majority of the turkish people : turkey , we are told , is not a christian nation ; its people simply wo n't fit in with the western european judeo-christian tradition .
it 's when these rationalizations fall on deaf ears that the old standby of retribution for treatment at the hands of the ottoman empire comes to the fore .
no one has to accept the sins of the ottoman empire to reject that argument .
turkey in any event is long past it .
the country has in recent years accepted more than 500,000 refugees from at least four bordering nations .
kurds , suffering what many people consider to be a current extermination campaign at the hands of syria , iran and iraq have inundated eastern turkey .
now it is their fellow turks arriving as refugees from bulgaria .
the turkish refugee tragedy and the ongoing crisis can not be ignored and shuttled off to that notorious dustbin of history that has become so convenient recently .
surely , the past suffering of any people at any time can not be simply filed away and forgotten .
but what the senate judiciary committee has done in supporting the strongly worded armenian resolution achieves no useful end ; it merely produces more controversy and embittered memories .
congress has enough difficulty dealing with the realities of the world as it currently exists .
bulgaria 's government has been behaving beyond the pale for months , and the u.s. does its values no credit by ignoring that while casting its votes into the past .
many in washington say president bush will have to raise taxes to pay for his war on drugs .
we have a better idea : dismantle hud to pay for the war on drugs .
housing and urban development 's budget is $ 17 billion .
from what we and the nation have been reading , the money is n't being spent very well .
the single most important contribution the government could make now to help the poor is to get the specter of drugs out of their neighborhoods .
if that takes money , take it away from this discredited federal department .
but of course the democrats pillorying hud in hearings and in the press have no such solution in mind .
instead , they 're scrambling to protect the very programs at the heart of the hud scandal .
this month , hud secretary jack kemp unveiled a series of proposed reforms to improve management at hud .
no doubt many of his ideas are worthy , but ultimately he is proposing to make fundamentally flawed programs work slightly more fairly and efficiently .
congress is unlikely to go even that far .
last week , secretary kemp ran into a buzzsaw of criticism from house banking committee members .
they were appalled , for instance , that he wanted to target more of the $ 3 billion community development block grant -lrb- cdbg -rrb- program to low-income projects and zero out the notorious `` discretionary '' funds that have allowed hud officials to steer contracts to political cronies .
these development grants mainly enrich developers who want to put up shopping centers and parking garages .
they also give those in congress political credit for bringing home the pork , and so they are popular with such members as mary rose oakar .
rep. oakar , a democrat from cleveland , wants a $ 6.9 million grant so cleveland can build an 18-story rock and roll hall of fame .
she says it 'd create 600 jobs and bring cleveland tourist revenue .
hud says the project does n't qualify , and mr. kemp says that rock 'n' roll musicians and the music industry ought to put up the money .
at the hearing , rep. oakar started wailing about `` phoney baloney regulations '' that would stand between her and `` housing for downtown cleveland .
'' rep. chalmers wylie , an ohio republican , rallied to the cause : `` i think the gentlelady is making an important statement .
the implication that if a congressman calls about a project in his district there 's something wrong , i think is most unfortunate .
'' we 're sure some theologian can explain the difference between what the republican consultants have been doing with hud and what these gentleladies and gentlemen want to do with hud .
our view is that given congress 's attitude toward hud , the place probably is beyond reform .
for more than 50 years the federal government has tried various ways to provide housing for the poor and revive cities .
in the process hud has wasted untold billions , created slums and invited corruption .
much of hud 's spending actually is disguised welfare for developers or the middle class .
that includes the cdbg funds and the federal housing administration , which loans out money for private home mortgages and has just been discovered to be $ 4 billion in the hole .
selling the fha 's loan portfolio to the highest bidder would save the taxpayers untold billions in future losses .
some hud money actually does trickle down to the poor , and zeroing out housing middlemen would free up more money for public housing tenants to manage and even own their units .
the rest ought to be used to clean out drugs from the neighbhorhoods .
rival gangs have turned cities into combat zones .
even suburban prince george 's county , md. , reported last week there have been a record 96 killings there this year , most of them drug-related .
innocent bystanders often are the victims .
a man in a wheelchair was gunned down in the crossfire of a miami drug battle .
a three-year-old brooklyn boy was used as a shield by a drug dealer .
decent life in the inner cities wo n't be restored unless the government reclaims the streets from the drug gangs .
until then , the billions hud spends on inner-city housing simply is wasted .
it 's still unclear whether secretary kemp wants to completely overhaul the engine room at hud or just tighten a few screws here and there .
no doubt he believes the place can be salvaged .
having seen the hypocrisy with which congress has addressed the hud scandals , we disagree .
it 's time to scrap the politically infested spending machine hud has become and channel the resources into the drug war .
randy delchamps was named chairman and chief executive officer of this grocery chain .
mr. delchamps , 46 years old , succeeds a.f. delchamps jr. , who died in a plane crash on sunday at the age of 58 .
randy delchamps retains his position as president .
natural upheavals , and most particularly earthquakes , are not only horrible realities in and of themselves , but also symbols through which the state of a society can be construed .
the rubble after the armenian earthquake a year ago disclosed , quite literally , a city whose larger structures had been built with sand .
the extent of the disaster stemmed from years of chicanery and bureaucratic indifference .
the larger parallel after the earthquake centered south of san francisco is surely with the state of the u.s. economy .
did the stock-market tremors of friday , oct. 13 , presage larger fragility , far greater upheavals ? are the engineering and architecture of the economy as vulnerable as the spans of the bay bridge ? the eerie complacency of the reagan-bush era has produced panglossian paeans about the present perfection of u.s. economic and social arrangements .
a licensed government intellectual , francis fukuyama , recently announced in the national interest that history is , so to speak , at an end since the course of human progress has now culminated in the glorious full stop of american civilization .
his observations were taken seriously .
but we are , in reality , witnessing the continuing decline of the political economy of capitalism : not so much the end of history but the history of the end .
the financial equivalent of the sand used by those armenian contractors is junk bonds and the leveraged buy-outs associated with them .
builders get away with using sand and financiers junk when society decides it 's okay , necessary even , to look the other way .
and by the early 1980s u.s. capitalists had ample reason to welcome junk bonds , to look the other way .
by that time they found extremely low profit rates from non-financial corporate investment .
government statistics in fact show that the profit rate -- net pretax profits divided by capital stock -- peaked in 1965 at 17.2 % .
that same calculation saw profit rates fall to 4.6 % in the recession year 1982 and the supposed miracle that followed has seen the profit rate rise only to 8.1 % in 1986 and 8 % in 1987 .
corresponding to the fall in profit rates was -- in the early 1980s -- the drop in the number arrived at if you divide the market value of firms by the replacement costs of their assets , the famous q ratio associated with prof. james tobin .
in theory , the value attached to a firm by the market and the cost of replacing its assets should be the same .
but of course the market could decide that the firm 's capital stock -- its assets -- means nothing if the firm is not producing profits .
this is indeed what the market decided .
by 1982 the ratio was 43.5 % , meaning that the market was valuing every dollar 's worth of the average firm 's assets at 43 cents .
from the history of capitalism we can take it as a sound bet that if it takes only 43 cents to buy a dollar 's worth of a firm 's capital stock , an alert entrepreneur wo n't look the other way .
his assumption is that the underlying profitability rate will go up and the capital assets he bought on the cheap will soon be producing profits , thus restoring the market 's faith in them .
hence the lbo craze .
but here is where the entrepreneur made a very risky bet , and where society was maybe foolish to look the other way .
the profit rate is still low and the q ratio was only 65 % in 1987 and 68.9 % in 1988 .
result : a landscape littered with lemons , huge debt burdens crushing down upon the arch and spans of corporate america .
the mounting risks did not go unobserved , even in the mid-1980s .
but there were enough promoters announcing the end of history -lrb- in this case suspension of normal laws of economic gravity -rrb- for society to continue shielding its eyes .
mainstream economists and commentators , craning their necks up at the great pyramids of junk financing , swiveling their heads to watch the avalanche of leveraged buy-outs , claimed the end result would be a leaner , meaner corporate america , with soaring productivity and profits and the weaker gone to the wall .
but this is not where the rewards of junk financing were found .
the beneficiaries were those financiers whose icon was the topic figure of '80s capitalism , michael milken 's $ 517 million salary in one year .
left-stream economists i associate with -- fellows in the union of radical political economists , most particularly robert pollin of the economics faculty at the university of california at riverside -- were not hypnotized in the manner of their pliant colleagues .
all along they have been noting the tremors and pointing out the underlying realities .
profit rates after the great merger wave are no higher , and now we have an extremely high-interest burden relative to cash flow .
the consequences of building empires with sand are showing up .
in contrast to previous estimates reckoning the default rate on junk bonds at 2 % or 3 % , a harvard study published in april of this year -lrb- and discussed in a lead story in the wall street journal for sept. 18 -rrb- found the default rate on these junk bonds is 34 % .
what is the consequence of a high-interest burden , high default rates and continued low profitability ? corporations need liquidity , in the form of borrowed funds .
without liquidity from the junk-bond market or cash flow from profits , they look to the government , which obediently assists the natural motions of the capitalist economy with charity in the form of cuts in the capital-gains tax rate or bailouts .
the consequence can be inflation , brought on as the effect of a desperate bid to avoid the deflationary shock of a sudden crash .
attacks on inflation come with another strategy of capital of a very traditional sort : an assault on wages .
mr. fukuyama , peering through binoculars at the end of history , said in his essay that `` the class issue has actually been successfully resolved in the west ... the egalitarianism of modern america represents the essential achievement of the classless society envisioned by marx .
'' mr. fukuyama might want to consult some american workers on the subject of class and egalitarianism .
from its peak in 1972 of $ 198.41 , the average american weekly wage had fallen to $ 169.28 in 1987 -- both figures being expressed in 1977 dollars .
in other words , after the glory boom of the reagan years , wages had sunk from the post world war ii peak by 16 % as capitalists , helped by the government , turned down the screws or went offshore .
but there are signs now -- the strikes by miners , boeing workers , telephone workers , etc. -- that this attack on wages is being more fiercely resisted .
these are long-term richter readings on american capitalism .
the whole structure is extremely shaky .
governments have become sophisticated in handling moments of panic -lrb- a word the london times forbade my father to use when he was reporting the wall street crash in 1929 -rrb- .
but sophistication has its limits .
the s&l bailout could cost $ 300 billion , computing interest on the government 's loans .
these are real costs .
under what weights will the federal deposit insurance corporation totter ? capitalism may now be engineered to withstand sudden shocks , but there are fault lines -- the crisis in profits , the assault on wages , the structural inequity of the system -- that make fools of those who claim that the future is here and that history is over .
mr. cockburn is a columnist for the nation and la weekly .
japan air lines , lufthansa german airlines and air france reportedly plan to form an international air-freight company this year , a move that could further consolidate the industry .
japanese newspaper nihon keizai shimbun reported that the three giants plan to integrate their cargo computers and ground-cargo and air-cargo systems .
they reportedly will invest a total of 20 billion yen -lrb- $ 140 million -rrb- in the venture , whose headquarters would be in france or west germany .
the action follows federal express corp. 's acquisition of flying tiger line inc. in august .
after that , `` it would make sense for airlines to talk about doing things jointly , '' said cotton daly , director of cargo services for new york consulting firm simat , helliesen & eichner inc .
mr. daly said such discussions are motivated by the competitive threat posed by federal express , united parcel service of america inc. and other fast-growing air-freight companies .
many airlines are talking about cargo ventures , and there have been rumors about such a tie between jal and european airlines .
in tokyo , a jal spokesman said he could n't confirm or deny the latest japanese report .
but he said jal is talking to lufthansa and air france about some sort of cargo venture .
`` it is just one of a number of strategies jal has embarked upon to come to terms with the situation in europe after 1992 , '' the deadline for ending trade barriers in the ec , he said .
in frankfurt , a lufthansa spokesman confirmed talks are under way , but declined to comment .
a lufthansa spokeswoman in tokyo said the head of lufthansa 's cargo operations had been in toyko last week for talks with jal .
in paris , air france declined to comment .
`` nothing is defined or signed at this point , '' mr. daly said of the talks .
whatever accord the three carriers reach , he said , he is skeptical it would create a separate airline .
if the three companies pool their air-freight businesses , their clout would be considerable .
according to figures from the international air transport association , they carried a combined 1.8 million tons of freight last year .
federal express and flying tiger , as separate companies , carried a combined 2.6 million tons .
air france and lufthansa last month concluded a far-reaching cooperation accord that includes air-freight activities .
they plan to increase cooperation in freight ground-handling and create a world-wide computer system to process cargo .
other airlines would have access to the system , they said , and negotiations with partners were already under way .
both european airlines operate extensive fleets of boeing 747 freighters and 747 combis , aircraft that carry both freight and passengers on the main deck .
they currently have large orders for cargo planes .
several airlines , including lufthansa , jal and cathay pacific airways , are working on a so-called global cargo system and are trying to attract other carriers to join , mr. daly said .
jal also has signaled it is looking for toeholds in europe before the end of 1992 .
last month , the carrier said it wanted to lease crews and planes from british airways so it could funnel its passengers from london to other european destinations .
british airways said it has n't received a proposal from jal .
but last week there were air-traffic negotiations between the u.k. and japan , a likely first step to any commercial agreement between jal and british airways or another u.k. carrier .
federal paper board co. said it completed the previously announced purchase of imperial cup corp. , a closely held maker of paper cups based in kenton , ohio .
terms were n't disclosed .
imperial cup has annual sales of approximately $ 75 million .
federal paper board sells paper and wood products .
in a move to prevent any dislocation in the financial markets from the california earthquake , the securities and exchange commission said it temporarily reassigned options listed on the pacific stock exchange to the american , new york and philadelphia stock exchanges and to the chicago board options exchange .
the decision , which affects millions of dollars of trading positions , was made late yesterday because the pacific exchange 's options floor was shut down as a result of tuesday 's earthquake .
the sec , faced with a major squeeze on options positions , said it was necessary to ensure that options listed on the exchange could be traded today and tomorrow .
sec chairman richard breeden said the cooperation by the exchanges would enable investors to buy and sell options listed solely on the pacific exchange , guaranteeing the liquidity of the market .
officials at the four exchanges said well over 50 traders from the pacific exchange were taking flights from san francisco late yesterday to the american , new york and philadelphia exchanges and to the cboe , where they would continue making markets in the pacific-listed options .
the big board said carpenters quickly erected a new options floor to accomodate 40 traders from the pacific exchange .
in addition , specialists on the exchanges agreed to provide backup capital for market-making in pacific exchange options traded on the exchanges .
trading was light on the pacific stock exchange yesterday , with workers at the exchange 's main floor in san francisco struggling to execute orders by flashlight as a result of a continuing power outage .
the most pressing problem was the suspension of options trading .
the pacific exchange has options for 129 underlying stock issues , including highly active hilton hotels corp. , which is listed on the big board .
investors were concerned that they might be unable to exercise options that expire tomorrow .
but professionals said throughout the day that the shutdown would n't be a cause for alarm even if it were to persist for several days .
`` i 've told my staff and clients that they still have the ability to exercise their options , because they are guaranteed by the options clearing corp. , '' said michael schwartz , a senior registered options strategist at oppenheimer & co .
the sec reassigned trading in the options , however , to allow investors to do more than simply exercise the options .
while the exchange 's equities floor in san francisco remained open on a limited basis , orders were being routed and executed in los angeles .
workers could dial out , but they could n't receive telephone calls .
`` it 's a very uncertain situation right now , '' said navin vyas , administrative assistant of trading floor operations of the exchange , which has daily volume of about 10 million shares .
because the exchange 's computer was rerouting orders to the exchange 's trading operations in los angeles , `` business is as usual '' mr. vyas said .
`` if one city is down , the other can take over .
'' meanwhile , the brokerage firms in san francisco were trying to cope .
charles daggs , chairman and chief executive officer of sutro & co. , said traders came to work at 5 a.m. pdt -- many on foot because of uncertain road and traffic conditions -- but learned that they would have to await a required inspection by the city in order to turn the power back on at the company 's two main facilities there .
that should happen by today , he said .
traders worked with the help of sunlight streaming through windows , despite large cracks in the walls and a lack of incoming phone calls .
also , most of the telecommunications equipment was out .
the traders were executing municipal bond , mutual fund and other orders through a sister firm , tucker anthony inc. , which is also owned by john hancock freedom securities but is based in new york .
`` we are having a regular day .
volume is down out of san francisco , but not out of the 11 outlying offices , '' mr. daggs added .
sutro 's oakland office executed orders through the sacramento office , which was n't affected by the quake .
others , like prudential-bache securities inc. , which has eight offices in the san francisco area , set up an 800 number yesterday morning for customers to obtain market commentary and other help .
at kidder , peabody & co. 's sacramento branch , manager janet white received calls yesterday morning from workers in san francisco who offered to work in sacramento .
then she discovered that quotron systems inc. 's sacramento lines were down , because they are normally tied in through a system that goes through san francisco .
so the kidder brokers had to call other company offices to get quotes on stocks .
at quotron , the company 's national call-in center , which swung into action for the first time last month for hurricane hugo , assembled a tactical team at 5 a.m. yesterday to begin rerouting lines and restore service to brokers and traders .
the company dispatched as many as 200 people in the san francisco area to do the work , though most of the rerouting was done by computer .
service appeared to be down throughout the financial district in downtown san francisco , while just parts of oakland and san jose were knocked out .
but dale irvine , director of the emergency center , said service was being restored to outlying san francisco areas .
in chicago yesterday , options clearing confirmed that it guarantees the pacific exchange options .
the firm also will permit its members and the public `` to exercise their put and call options contracts traded on the pacific exchange '' even if the exchange is closed , said wayne luthringshausen , chairman of options clearing .
-lrb- put options give holders the right , but not the obligation , to sell a financial instrument at a specified price , while call options give holders the right , but not the obligation , to buy a financial instrument at a specified price -rrb- .
investors and traders in pacific exchange options `` are protected to the extent that they can convert their put and call options into the underlying instrument , '' mr. luthringshausen said .
`` we are seeing such exercises today , in fact .
international business machines corp. said its board approved the purchase of $ 1 billion of its common shares , a move that should help support its battered stock .
even as the stock market has generally done well this year , ibm 's shares have slipped steadily from its 52-week high of $ 130.875 .
yesterday 's closing price of $ 101.75 , down 50 cents , in composite trading on the new york stock exchange , puts the stock at about 1 1/2 times book value , which is as low as it has sunk over the past decade .
the announcement came after the market 's close .
the move by ibm was n't exactly a surprise .
the company has spent some $ 5 billion over the past 3 1/2 years to buy back 42 million common shares , or roughly 7 % of those outstanding .
in addition , despite ibm 's well-publicized recent problems , the computer giant still generates enormous amounts of cash .
as of the end of the second quarter , it had $ 4.47 billion of cash and marketable securities on hand .
as a result , some securities analysts had predicted in recent days that ibm would authorize additional purchases .
in armonk , n.y. , a spokesman said that although ibm did n't view its spending as necessarily a way to support the stock , it thought the purchases were a good way to improve such financial measurements as per-share earnings and return on equity .
`` we view it as a good long-term investment , '' the spokesman said .
in the short term , the move is likely to have little effect .
at yesterday 's closing price , $ 1 billion would buy back about 10 million shares , or less than 2 % of the roughly 580 million outstanding .
in addition , as of sept. 30 , the company still had authorization to buy $ 368 million of stock under a prior repurchase program .
over the long term , however , ibm 's stock repurchases -- along with its hefty , $ 4.84-a-share annual dividend and generally loyal following among large institutional investors -- are providing a floor for the stock price .
although ibm last year produced its first strong results in four years and was expected to continue to roll this year , it began faltering as early as january .
first , it had trouble manufacturing a chip for its mainframes , ibm 's bread-and-butter business .
then it had a series of smaller glitches , including problems manufacturing certain personal computers and the delay in the announcement of some important workstations .
finally , ibm had to delay the introduction of some high-end disk drives , which account for 10 % of its $ 60 billion of annual revenue .
none of the problems is necessarily fatal , and they are n't all necessarily even related .
there are also other factors at work that are outside ibm 's control , such as currency exchange rates .
the strong dollar , which reduces the value of overseas earnings and revenue when they are translated into dollars , is expected to knock 80 to 85 cents off ibm 's per-share earnings for the full year .
without that problem , ibm might have matched last year 's earnings of $ 5.81 billion , or $ 9.80 a share .
still , investors will take some convincing before they get back into ibm 's stock in a big way .
steve milunovich , a securities analyst at first boston , said that while investors were looking for an excuse to buy ibm shares a year ago , even the big institutional investors are looking for a reason to avoid the stock these days .
on wall street yesterday , northern california 's killer earthquake was just another chance to make a buck .
at the opening bell , investors quickly began singling out shares of companies expected to profit or suffer in some way from the california disaster , including insurers , construction-related companies , refiners and housing lenders .
brokerage houses jumped in , touting `` post-quake demand '' stocks , and kidder , peabody & co. set up a toll-free hot line for san franciscans who might need emergency investment advice and help in transferring funds .
`` wall street thinks of everything in terms of money , '' says tom gallagher , a senior oppenheimer & co. trader .
however , he added , such event-driven trading moves typically last only a few hours and are often made without full information .
the most popular plays of the day were insurance companies such as general re corp. , which rose $ 2.75 to $ 86.50 , nac re corp. , up $ 2 to $ 37.75 , american international group inc. , up $ 3.25 to $ 102.625 , and cigna corp. , up 87.5 cents to $ 62.50 .
yesterday , the brokerage firm conning & co. said insurers will use the earthquake as an excuse to raise insurance rates , ending their long price wars .
before this bullish theory surfaced , some insurance stocks initially fell , indicating that investors thought the quake might cost insurers a lot of money .
in fact , fireman 's fund corp. , which ended the day off 50 cents to $ 36.50 , said earthquake damage would slightly hurt fourth-quarter profit .
on the prospect for rebuilding northern california , investors bid up cement-makers calmat co. , up $ 2.75 to $ 28.75 , and lone star industries inc. , up $ 1.75 to $ 29.25 .
bridge and road builders had a field day , including kasler corp. , up $ 2.125 to $ 9.875 , guy f. atkinson co. , up 87.5 to $ 61.875 , and morrison knudsen corp. , which reported higher third-quarter earnings yesterday , up $ 2.25 to $ 44.125 .
fluor corp. , a construction engineering firm , gained 75 cents to $ 33.375 .
but home-building stocks were a mixed bag .
timber stocks got a big boost .
georgia pacific corp. , up $ 1.25 to $ 58 , and maxxam inc. , up $ 3 to $ 43.75 , both reported strong profits .
merrill lynch & co. touted georgia-pacific , louisiana pacific corp. and willamette industries inc. as the best post-quake plywood plays .
other gainers were companies with one or more undamaged california refineries .
tosco corp. jumped $ 1.125 to $ 20.125 and chevron corp. , despite a temporary pipeline shutdown , rose $ 1 to $ 65 .
meanwhile , shares of some big housing lenders got hit , on the likelihood that the lenders ' collateral -- people 's homes -- suffered physical damage and perhaps a loss in value .
wells fargo & co. fell 50 cents to $ 81.50 , and bankamerica corp. fell 50 cents to $ 31.875 .
some california thrift stocks also fell , including golden west financial corp. and h.f. ahmanson & co. , which reported lower earnings yesterday .
`` property values did n't go up in california yesterday , '' says one money manager .
pacific gas & electric co. fell 37.5 cents to $ 19.625 .
one of its power generators was damaged , though the company said there wo n't be any financial impact .
pacific telesis group lost 62.5 cents to $ 44.625 .
a computer failure delayed its earnings announcement , and some investors think it might have extra costs to repair damaged telephone lines .
heavy construction , property-casualty insurance and forest products were among the best performing industry groups in the dow jones equity market index yesterday .
friday 's stock market plunge claimed its second victim among the scores of futures and options trading firms here .
petco options , an options trading firm owned by the family of the deceased former chicago board of trade chairman ralph peters , is getting out of the trade clearing , or processing and guaranteeing , business after sustaining a multimillion dollar loss friday , options industry officials said .
nearly 75 options traders on the chicago board options exchange who cleared trades through petco , including a handful of traders who lost between $ 500,000 to $ 1 million themselves as a result of friday 's debacle , are trying to transfer their business to other clearing firms , cboe members said .
timothy vincent , petco chief executive officer , confirmed that petco was withdrawing from the clearing business .
`` the owners of the company got a look at the potential risks in this business , and after monday they felt they did n't want to be exposed any more , '' he said .
he added that petco remained in compliance with all industry capital requirements during the market 's rapid plunge friday and monday 's rebound .
a cboe spokeswoman declined comment on petco .
over the weekend fossett corp. , another options trading firm , transferred the clearing accounts of about 160 traders to first options of chicago , a unit of continental bank corp. , because it could n't meet regulatory capital requirements after friday 's market slide .
the unprecedented transfer of accounts underscored the options industry 's desire not to have its credibility tarnished by potentially widespread trading defaults on monday .
the cboe , american stock exchange , options clearing corp. and stephen fossett , owner of fossett , joined in putting up $ 50 million to guarantee the accounts at first options .
the head of another small options clearing firm , who asked not to be identified , said that the heightened volatility in the financial markets in recent years makes it increasingly difficult for any but the largest financial trading firms to shoulder the risk inherent in the highly leveraged options and futures business .
prior to the introduction of financial futures in the late 1970s , most trading firms clustered around the lasalle street financial district here were family operations handed down from one generation to the next .
most also were relatively undercapitalized compared with the size of most wall street securities firms .
mr. peters , a lasalle street legend among the post-world war ii generation of commodity traders , was rumored to have amassed a multimillion-dollar fortune from commodity trading and other activities by the time he died in may .
part of a series -rcb- betty lombardi is a mild-mannered homemaker and grandmother in rural hunterdon county , n.j .
but put her behind a shopping cart and she turns ruthless .
if colgate toothpaste offers a tempting money-saving coupon , she 'll cross crest off her shopping list without a second thought .
never mind that her husband prefers crest .
some weeks when her supermarket runs a double-coupon promotion , she boasts that she shaves $ 22 off her bill .
money is n't the only thing that makes her dump once favorite brands .
after she heard about the artery-clogging hazards of tropical oils in many cookies , she dropped pepperidge farm and started buying brands free of such oils .
`` i always thought pepperidge farm was tasty and high quality , '' mrs. lombardi says .
`` but i do n't want any of that oil for my grandkids .
'' -lrb- pepperidge farm says it ca n't tell exactly how many customers it has lost , but it hopes to remove the objectionable tropical oil from all its products by year end .
-rrb- clearly , people like mrs. lombardi are giving marketers fits .
she represents a new breed of savvy consumer who puts bargain prices , nutritional and environmental concerns , and other priorities ahead of old-fashioned brand loyalty .
while brand loyalty is far from dead , marketing experts say it has eroded during the 1980s .
marketers themselves are partly to blame : they 've increased spending for coupons and other short-term promotions at the expense of image-building advertising .
what 's more , a flood of new products has given consumers a dizzying choice of brands , many of which are virtually carbon copies of one other .
`` marketers have brought this on themselves with their heavy use '' of promotions , contends joe plummer , an executive vice president at the d'arcy masius benton & bowles ad agency .
`` without some real product improvements , it 's going to be difficult to win that loyalty back .
'' the wall street journal 's `` american way of buying '' survey this year found that most consumers switch brands for many of the products they use .
for the survey , peter d. hart research associates asked some 2,000 consumers , including mrs. lombardi , whether they usually buy one brand of a certain type of product or have no brand loyalty .
more than half the users of 17 of the 25 products included in the survey said they 're brand switchers .
overall , 12 % of consumers are n't brand loyal for any of the 25 product categories .
about 47 % are loyal for one to five of the products .
only 2 % are brand loyal in 16 to 20 of the categories , and no one is loyal for more than 20 types of products .
for such products as canned vegetables and athletic shoes , devotion to a single brand was quite low , with fewer than 30 % saying they usually buy the same brand .
only for cigarettes , mayonnaise and toothpaste did more than 60 % of users say they typically stick with the same brand .
people tend to be most loyal to brands that have distinctive flavors , such as cigarettes and ketchup .
kathie huff , a respondent in the journal survey from spokane , wash. , says her husband is adamant about eating only hunt 's ketchup .
he simply ca n't stomach the taste of heinz , she says .
the 31-year-old homemaker adds , `` the only other thing i 'm really loyal to is my virginia slims cigarettes .
coke and pepsi are all the same to me , and i usually buy whichever brand of coffee happens to be on sale .
'' brand imagery plays a significant role in loyalty to such products as cigarettes , perfume and beer .
people often stay with a particular brand because they want to be associated with the image its advertising conveys , whether that 's macho marlboro cigarettes or cher 's uninhibited perfume .
loyalty lags most for utilitarian products like trash bags and batteries .
only 23 % of trash-bag users in the journal survey usually buy the same brand , and just 29 % of battery buyers stick to one brand .
underwear scored a middling 36 % in brand loyalty , but consumer researchers say that 's actually quite high for such a mundane product .
`` in the past , you just wore fruit of the loom and did n't care , '' says peter kim , u.s. director of consumer behavior research for the j. walter thompson ad agency .
`` the high score reflects the attempts to make underwear more of a fashion image business for both men and women .
'' he believes there 's opportunity for a smart gasoline marketer to create a strong brand image and more consumer loyalty .
what loyalty there is to gas brands , he believes , is a matter of stopping at the most conveniently located service stations .
brand loyalty was stronger among older consumers in the journal survey .
nearly one-fourth of participants age 60 and older claim brand loyalty for more than 10 of the 25 products in the survey ; only 9 % of those age 18 to 29 have such strong allegiance .
higher-income people also tend to be more brand loyal these days , the journal survey and other research studies indicate .
marketers speculate that more affluent people tend to lead more pressured lives and do n't have time to research the products they buy for the highest quality and most reasonable price .
an established brand name is insurance that at least the product will be of acceptable quality , if not always the best value for the money .
it 's sort of loyalty by default .
meanwhile , `` the bottom end of the market is becoming less loyal , '' says laurel cutler , vice chairman of the ad agency fcb/leber katz partners .
`` they 're buying whatever 's cheaper .
'' the biggest wild card in the brand loyalty game : how those hotly pursued but highly unpredictable baby boomers will behave as they move into middle age .
they grew up with more brand choices than any generation and have shown less allegiance so far .
but now that they 're settling down and raising families , might they also show more stability in their brand choices ? mr. kim of j. walter thompson does n't think so .
he believes baby boomers will continue to be selective in their brand loyalties .
`` earlier generations were brand loyal across categories , '' he says , `` but boomers tend to be brand loyal in categories like running shoes and bottled water , but less so in others like toilet paper and appliances .
'' while not as brand loyal as in the past , consumers today do n't buy products capriciously , either .
rather , they tend to have a set of two or three favorites .
sometimes , they 'll choose ragu spaghetti sauce ; other times , it will be prego .
advertisers attribute this shared loyalty to the striking similarity among brands .
if a more absorbent pampers hits the market , you can be sure a new and improved huggies wo n't be far behind .